12 MANAGING DECISION UNCERTAINTY USING
RANDOM FORESTS
12.1 Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
12.2 Features of Decision Uncertainty
12.3 Backorder and Its Implications
12.4 Machine-Learning Options to Aid in Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
12.4.1  Components of a Decision Tree Model
12.4.2  Classification Trees
12.4.3  Advantages, Disadvantages, and W ays to Improve Classification Trees
12.5 Random Forest
12.6 Backorder Prediction Using Random Forests
12.6.1  Data Import and Selection
12.6.2  Imbalance in the Data
12.6.3  Hyperparameter Tuning
12.6.4  Testing the Performance of Our Random Forest Model
12.6.4.1  Accuracy and ROC V alues
12.6.4.2  Confusion Matrix, Sensitivity , and Specificity
12.6.4.3  Role of Downsampling
12.7 Business Insights and Summary
12.8 Implementation Using R: Backorder Prediction
12.9 Understanding the Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the importance of ef ficient business decisions, anticipating demand
2. Learn decision-making under uncertainty
3. Apply decision tree models to predict uncertain decisions
4. Review the advantages and limitations of tree models
5. Employ boosted decision trees to predict stocking decisions
12.1 DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Decision-making under uncertainty has been studied as a continuum of decisions that are made when
information is missing or is available only in probabilistic form (e.g., the likelihood of success is 80%).1
Consider the following two scenarios that highlight the inherent uncertainty in business decision-
making.
In the first scenario, a major airline, considered a dominant player at one of its hub airports, is faced
with a new challenge: the entry of a low-cost, no-frills competitor . It has to decide whether to react to
the new entrant (action) or not do anything (inaction). Both decisions carry inherent uncertainties. If it
decides to take an action and reduce price, there are several uncertain outcomes. First, will a price
reduction deter customers from flocking to the new entrant? Second, will it actually increase market
share, or will it erode profits? Third, will the price drop strengthen its brand image, or will it be seen as
a sign of weakness? Fourth, actions like price reductions can sometimes lead to price wars, which
might hurt the industry as a whole. Alternatively , the airline can maintain the status quo, but this
inaction has its own uncertainties. First, how many existing customers might be persuaded away by
the competitor ’s lower prices or novel of ferings. Second, staying the course might be perceived by
stockholders as either a confident move, showcasing the brand’ s strength, or indicating an
unwillingness to adapt to changing market dynamics. Third, by not adjusting to the changing market
dynamics, there’ s a potential loss of opportunities that the new entrant might exploit. Fourth, will the
business be able to recover its position if it realizes too late that a response was necessary?
In the second scenario, an electronics retailer is preparing to stock a new smartphone. Due to supply
chain issues from the manufacturer , the retailer learns that they will receive only half of the originally
ordered units triggering the following decision dilemma: Should the retailer accept backorders, allowing
customers to reserve now and receive the product later when more stock arrives, or should they sell
only the available stock and potentially lose sales to competitors? Both decisions have their inherent
uncertainties.
First, it is unclear how many customers will prefer immediate purchase compared to those willing to
wait for a backordered item. Second, of fering backorders might be seen as a service, but extended
wait times can negatively af fect customer satisfaction, leading to refunds and poor customer reviews.
Third, if the timeline for additional shipments from the manufacturer is not clear , it adds to the
uncertainty . A short delay may be acceptable to customers, but longer ones can af fect sales and
customer trust. Fourth, information (or lack of information) about the stock availability at competitor
outlets can add to the uncertainty . If competitors also do not have suf ficient stock, not of fering
backorders might result in lost sales.
These scenarios highlight business decisions with inherent uncertainty . Other decisions fraught with
uncertainty include, for instance, (1) deciding between of fering price discounts to encourage growth or
increasing prices to increase profitability , (2) decisions about allocating resources to retain current
customers versus recruit new ones, (3) whether to invest in an immediate profitable venture or focus
on long-term projects that might yield larger returns later , or (4) projecting the impact of weather and
other natural events on the supply chain that can disrupt transportation, delay deliveries, and af fect
raw material availability .
12.2 FEATURES OF DECISION UNCERTAINTY
Uncertain decisions have several important features that need to be considered.2 First, what is the
value in taking a decision under uncertainty versus gathering more information before proceeding?
Let’s take the example of a pharmaceutical company that is performing drug trials for a new cancer
treatment. It will use randomized controlled trials (RCT s) to control for all factors and find the influence
of the focal drug on cancer treatment; this is generally referred to as internal validity . However , the
uncertainty that the company has to face is how the drug will fare when patients with dif ferent
comorbidities, of dif ferent races, or with any other characteristics that makes them respond to the drug
differently , actually take the drug after it has been introduced in the market; this is generally referred to
as external validity . Therefore, the company has to weigh the value of introducing a beneficial drug
against the risk associated with such an introduction.
A second feature of uncertain decisions is to determine when and how to respond. Consider the earlier
example of a major airline when a low-cost competitor enters the scene. The airline must decide when
and by how much to modify its fares and whether to introduce new of fers. The decision resembles a
balancing act between ensuring profitability and incurring costs from strategy changes. To determine
the best course of action, companies often conduct sensitivity analyses. This involves tweaking
different decision variables and observing the potential impact on outcomes at dif ferent points in time.
By doing so, the airline can gauge which factors, when and to what degree, might necessitate a
change in their initial decision.
A third feature of uncertain decisions is to determine which options to follow: Should the business stick
to conventional options or explore new ones? For instance, in our earlier example when an electronics
retailer is confronted with a backorder situation for a popular new smartphone, the conventional
approaches are to either sell the available stock or continue accepting backorders. However , given the
uncertainties and potential customer dissatisfaction, they might consider a new strategy: of fering
discounts to those customers willing to backorder and wait for delivery . While this strategy might entail
a short-term reduction in profit, it has the potential to increase long-term customer loyalty and mitigate
dissatisfaction from extended wait times.
To reduce decision uncertainty , prediction models are used that simulate dif ferent potential situations
and how these situations will impact dif ferent aspects of the business. In this chapter , we will examine
how machine-learning algorithms can be used to solve problems in supply chain management,
especially when decisions need to be made with uncertain information. One such decision-making
under uncertainty is identifying products that will be backordered.
12.3 BACKORDER AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
Beginning in 2020, the microchip industry faced supply chain issues because of the pandemic, labor
shortages, and geopolitical unrest. This resulted in many technological products going out of stock.
Consumers who placed orders were left waiting, sometimes indefinitely , because the firms were not
sure when they would receive the chips to fulfill these orders. The Defense Logistics Agency of the
U.S. Department of Defense, which manages the global defense supply chain, faces similar
challenges. It routinely takes steps to maximize combat readiness by minimizing backorders.3
Backorder  can be defined as an order of a product that a firm cannot fill due to the product’ s
unavailability but expects to fill at a future date. Backorders result in disappointed consumers and
reduced profitability for firms as backorders can deter consumers from purchasing the product. Recent
research has demonstrated that consumers whose products were backordered are far less likely to
purchase the product in the future compared to consumers whose products were not backordered.4
The longer the backorder lasts, the greater the drop in future purchases. Hence, businesses try their
level best to avoid the situation of backorders piling up because of its long-term impact on customer
satisfaction, ability to retain customers, and firm profitability . One commonly recommended way to
avoid backorders is to accurately forecast demand. However , that is easier said than done because
several factors outside the influence of the business introduce uncertainties in forecasting, such as
changing customer tastes that make demand uncertain, economic upturns and downturns, gross
domestic product (GDP), geopolitical conflicts, unrest, or a pandemic. Firms do not want to lose
customers or lose their trust by not being able to fulfill an order on time. However , the enormous
pressure that firms face to ensure timely delivery of products, especially when the firm itself is reliant
on other suppliers for parts, is not trivial. This pressure can result in increased labor and production
costs, overstocking to prevent shortages, and high shipment expenses.
Backorders also cause the bullwhip  effect, which occurs when a small change in demand is
overestimated and communicated through the supply chain to retailers, wholesalers, distributors, and
eventually manufacturers. However , if the demand is temporary , it dies out, causing an oversupply of
some products. W e witnessed this during the pandemic when people staying home started remodeling
and a huge demand for furniture ensued, resulting in furniture being severely backordered. To make up
for the increased demand, firms manufactured more furniture. However , with the easing of the
pandemic restrictions, the demand for furniture went down, resulting in an oversupply of furniture. This
is a classic example of the bullwhip ef fect depicted in Figure 12.1 .
Description
Figure 12.1  Bullwhip Ef fect
However , we need to keep in mind one important factor when considering backorders. Although
estimating which products are likely to be backordered may be one of the most uncertain situations to
predict and can cause a high level of disruption for the business and its customers, it is not an issue
that businesses face routinely or at predictable intervals. It is possible that a business may not have
faced a backorder issue for several years. Hence, the data the business needs to predict backorders
may be imbalanced. That is, businesses may not have a very good method to predict why and when
they might face a backorder issue. W e know that the predictive model is only as good as the data it is
trained on. Hence, having imbalanced data can af fect the quality of predictions. Machine-learning
methods are now routinely used to tackle the problem of backorder forecasting, given their ability to
analyze large structured and unstructured datasets that are unbalanced.
We next present a tree-based machine-learning method that has been used to estimate backorders so
that strategies can be devised to address this supply chain issue.
12.4 MACHINE-LEARNING OPTIONS TO AID IN DECISION-
MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Machine learning, especially tree-based models, of fer businesses a structured way to make decisions
under uncertainty . These models segment data based on dif ferent conditions, providing insight into
complex scenarios. For instance, the airline faced with competition from a low-cost carrier could use
decision trees to analyze historical data on passenger preferences, price sensitivities, and other
factors to predict potential outcomes. Similarly , the electronics retailer uncertain about how to manage
stock for a new smartphone could deploy tree-based models to evaluate previous product launches
and understand customer behavior patterns in the face of backorders. Through these models,
businesses can simulate various decision pathways, assess probable outcomes, and make more
informed choices even in the presence of uncertainty .
12.4.1 Components of a Decision Tree Model
Decision trees are supervised algorithms  that require labeled data (i.e., data where the relationship
between the predictor and the outcome variable is available). Decision trees can be used for both
regression tasks and classification depending on whether the outcome variable is continuous or
categorical. The term classification and regression tree  (CAR T) captures this ability of tree models (we
will use the terms decision tree  and tree model  interchangeably , but they mean the same thing). For
backorder predictions, we will focus on classification trees.
Before we discuss how classification trees make predictions, let’ s understand the dif ferent components
of a decision tree as depicted in Figure 12.2 .
Figure 12.2  Components of a Decision Tree
The root node  is the first node in a decision tree. This also represents the predictor variable or
feature that is split first to divide the entire data into two sets.
The terminal node  or leaf is the final node of a decision tree that cannot be divided further . These
terminal nodes contain the mean value of the outcome variable (if the outcome is a continuous
variable) or the majority class (if the outcome is a classification task).
The internal/decision node  is a subnode of the tree between the root node and the terminal node.
At an internal or decision node, the data are further divided into new internal nodes or into leaf
nodes.
A branch  represents the connection or relationship between a root node and an internal node,
between internal nodes, or between an internal node and a leaf node.
The depth  of a tree is the longest distance between the root node and any terminal node (leaf).
The tree in Figure 12.2  has a depth of 2.
12.4.2 Classification Trees
Consider a simple illustration of backorder prediction. Assume our dataset has two predictor variables:
forecasted sales  and transit time for the product to arrive . Both are categorical variables with two
levels: low and high. That is, the forecasted sales for a product can be low or high, and the transit time
for the product to arrive from the manufacturer to a retailer can also be low or high. The outcome
variable is whether the product was backordered ( yes or no). Our goal is to come up with a simple
prediction model that tells us if a product will be backordered based on its forecasted sales and transit
time. The data are presented in Table 12.1 .
Forecasted sales Transit time Backordered
Low Low No
High Low Yes
Low Low No
High High Yes
Low Low Yes
High High No
High Low Yes
Low High No
High High Yes
The first challenge in building a classification tree is to choose a variable that first splits the root node.
Let’s consider Figure 12.3 . The dark circles represent when the product was backordered, and the light
circles represent when it was not backordered. W e see that the variable of forecasted sales performs
better at classifying whether a product was backordered. In the low-forecast group, three out of the
four data points are not backordered, and in the high-forecast group, four out of the five data points are
backordered. In an intuitive way , high- and low-forecast groups are able to segregate backordered and
not-backordered data points more ef fectively than high- and low-transit-time groups. But this is just a
visual assessment. How can we quantify which variable is a better classifier? Gini impurity provides us
with one way to do this. Each predictor variable at each level is 1 – (fraction of backordered = “Y es”
datapoints)2 − (fraction of backordered = “No”  datapoints)2. Lower values of Gini impurity are preferred
over higher values. Let’ s understand how to calculate the Gini index for the example we are working
with.
Description
Figure 12.3  Gini Index Calculation
For forecasted sales as shown in Figure 12.3 , we have five data points with high-forecast sales and
four data points with low-forecast sales. Among the five data points in the high-forecast group, four are
for backorders, and one is not. The fraction of items backordered in this group is 4
5, and the fraction of
items not backordered is 1
5. The Gini impurity for this group is 1−(4
5)2
−(1
5)2=0.32. Among
the four data points in the low-forecast group, one was backordered, and three were not. The fraction
of items backordered in this group is 1
4, and the fraction of items not backordered is 3
4. The Gini
impurity for this group is 1−(1
4)2
−(3
4)2
=0.375. Now we can calculate Gini weighted
impurity for forecasted sales. Since there are nine data points, the weighted Gini impurity for the low-
forecast group will be 5
9, and for the high-forecast group it will be 4
9. The weighted average will be
(5
9)0.32+(4
9)0.375=0.34.
Similarly , we can calculate weighted Gini impurity for the transit time variable (as depicted in Figure
12.4).
Description
Figure 12.4  Gini Impurity for Forecasted Sales and Transit Time
We find that Gini impurity is lower with forecasted sales; hence, it becomes the variable to split the root
node. The resulting decision tree will look like Figure 12.5 , in which it splits further based on the transit
time.
Description
Figure 12.5  Decision Tree Splits
Since we have only two predictor variables, this will not be split further , and the final nodes will be the
terminal nodes or leaves. Predictions associated with each leaf will reflect the majority class. As an
example, if the majority class in the leftmost leaf is no (2) and the minority class is yes (1), then the
prediction associated with this leaf will be no.
12.4.3 Advantages, Disadvantages, and Ways to Improve
Classification Trees
Classification trees of fer many advantages. First, several types of predictor variables (numeric or
categorical in nature) can be included in the analysis, and they don’t need to be scaled or
standardized. Second, outliers don’t influence classification tree predictions; therefore, no outlier
removal is necessary before analysis. Third, trees are not af fected by the presence of irrelevant
predictors. If an irrelevant predictor is included in the analysis, the analysis is not af fected even when
the user is uncertain which predictors have a significant influence. Classification trees can also handle
the presence of correlated predictors (multicollinearity), which is very common in real-world data since
many of the predictors that users might identify as being important for the analysis could be correlated
with one another . Fourth, interactions among predictor variables are automatically incorporated in the
analysis; therefore, there is no need to prespecify interactions, which is necessary in methods such as
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression and logistic regression.
However , there are some disadvantages  of using classification trees. Individual trees do not have as
much predictive power as many other methods such as logistic regression or neural nets. Trees are
also very sensitive to variations in the training data. In other words, if we divide the training data
randomly into two parts and train two dif ferent trees, then there is a high likelihood that both trees will
fail to make similar predictions.
One way to improve the predictive power of trees and reduce their sensitivity to variations in the
training data is to combine the predictions of many trees. The intuition behind combining various trees
can be understood through the example of measuring temperature. Imagine we have a thermometer
that has some random error . Every time we measure temperature, it gives slightly dif ferent readings.
One way to obtain a more stable and reliable estimate of temperature is to take several measurements
of temperature and then average them. In a similar vein, when we combine predictions of various
trees, we reduce variation in their predictions and improve their predictive power . The combination of
several trees is known as an ensemble of trees; since an ensemble of trees is a forest, the method that
creates this ensemble is called random forest.
12.5 RANDOM FOREST
The first step builds multiple distinct trees by using bootstrap samples of training data. Bootstrapping  is
a process of sampling data points from the original dataset with replacement. Imagine we have 30
balls in a box and each of them has a distinct number written on it. In sampling with replacement, we
first randomly pick a ball, write down the number written on the ball, and put it back in the box. W e
again pick a ball, write down the number , and put it back in the box. W e are allowed to randomly pick
the same ball more than once. Repeating this process 30 times will give us our first bootstrap sample.
For a dataset, bootstrap samples are formed by sampling rows with replacement from the original
dataset. Since we are replacing each row , there is a possibility that some rows will be picked up more
than once, that our bootstrap sample will have duplicate rows of data, and that some rows from the
original dataset will be missing in our bootstrap sample. This is exactly what we want because this will
help us build diverse trees. This process of building trees from several bootstrap samples and
combining their prediction is called bagging  (short for bootstrap aggregation ).
In a regular decision tree, all the predictor variables are considered at each split; however , this leads to
a problem. If there is a predictor variable that is very good at predicting the outcome variable, then
regardless of how many bootstrap samples we use, there is a very high chance that all the trees will
look the same and their predictions will be very correlated. In other words, we will fail to build diverse
trees. The second step of random forest, therefore, goes beyond simple bagging. It combines bagging
with an idea known as subspace sampling  (also referred to as feature bagging ). At each split, it
randomly selects a subset of predictor variables that are the only ones considered; then a new subset
of predictors is considered at the next split from the remaining predictors. So if there are 20 predictor
variables, then 5 are randomly chosen at each split. Their performance on a criterion like Gini impurity
is compared, and the best-performing variable splits the data. At the next split, a new random sample
of 5 predictors from the remaining set of 19 predictors is chosen. This method ensures that if a strong
predictor exists, then it is not always chosen to split the data. This way , we get diverse trees from
bootstrap samples.
In the third step of random forest, each tree makes its prediction, and the final prediction is based on
the consensus value. The outcome that receives the most votes is the final prediction. As an example,
if we build 100 trees for a new product where the outcome is unknown, and out of these 100 trees 65
trees predict that the product will be backordered and 35 predict that the product will not be
backordered, then the final prediction of the random forest will be yes.
As can be noticed, we have not discussed any method to find the optimum number of predictor
variables randomly sampled in the second step. There is no way to estimate the optimum number from
the dataset. Therefore, this becomes a hyperparameter that needs to be tuned using cross-validation.
Another hyperparameter is the number of trees we want to grow . This also needs to be tuned using
cross-validation.
12.6 BACKORDER PREDICTION USING RANDOM FORESTS
Let’s assume that a manufacturer of small machines has set up an inventory system to ensure that it
can keep track of obtaining machined parts from its suppliers so it can build its machines and deliver
them on time to its customers. However , recently , the manufacturer has noticed some backorder
issues, leading to dissatisfied customers. To prevent such backorder issues from occurring in the
future, the manufacturer uses random forests to build a model for predicting (and hence addressing)
backorders. Let’ s understand the process and perform the analysis ourselves. W e will refer to the
business as the manufacturer , and the machines it manufactures as products.
12.6.1 Data Import and Selection
The variables in our analysis include the following.5 The outcome variable indicated whether a product
was backordered ( yes vs. no). The random forest was provided with 16 predictor variables such as the
current level of inventory; usual and current transit time; sales forecasts for the next 3, 6, and 9
months; sales in the past 3, 6, and 9 months; minimum recommended stock; and machined parts due
from the manufacturer ’s suppliers.
We begin our analysis by importing the data and checking the class of nonnumeric variables. W e want
to ensure that nonnumeric or categorical variables are recognized as factors in the analysis.
As we discussed earlier , backorder data tend to have a class imbalance, where the number of items
that were backordered is proportionately less than the number of items that were not backordered.
Let’s check this in our data through a simple plot ( Figure 12.6 ).
Figure 12.6  Data Imbalance
The plot shows that products that were backordered (i.e., when the outcome variable was yes)
represented approximately 1
5 of the data. This makes the times the product was not backordered (i.e.,
when the outcome variable was no) a majority level (also referred to as majority class). Yes becomes a
minority level. It is necessary to use a sampling method that provides an appropriate representation to
the minority level. Next we discuss one such sampling method.
12.6.2 Imbalance in the Data
To handle the issue of class imbalance, we use a downsampling method that samples rows from the
training data in such a way that the majority level (when the products were not backordered—i.e.,
when outcome variable = no) is sampled less. This increases the proportion of the minority level (when
the products were backordered) in model training. W e set the train data in such a way that the
backorders are at most 1.5 times as many rows as minority levels. If we compare this situation to our
base situation when no sampling is applied, we will have majority levels with 4 times as many rows as
minority levels.
However , having corrected for the imbalance in the training data so that the model has enough data
points from which to learn how backorders are af fected by the predictors, we need to ensure that the
model is tested on a dataset that captures the real world. The real world has a data imbalance, where
backorders are fewer in number; therefore, we need to have test data that reflect this smaller number
of backorders compared to all orders so that the ef ficacy of the model in the real world can be tested.
Thus, in the test data, no undersampling is used, and the imbalance is retained.
12.6.3 Hyperparameter Tuning
We formulate the model with backorder as the outcome variable and all other variables as predictors.
We then specify the random forest algorithm and also the hyperparameters—such as the number of
predictors randomly sampled at each split when a tree is created, the number of trees contained in a
random forest, and the minimum number of data points in a node required for the node to be split
further (please see the Technical Appendix for a detailed description of hyperparameters). Each
hyperparameter is then tuned through a grid search. Since our outcome variable is categorical ( yes
and no), we need to ensure that our model type is specified as a classification model.
We use fivefold cross-validation, indicating that there will be five partitions of the training dataset and
that the performance of each hyperparameter combination will be assessed using this cross-validation
procedure. Moreover , we specify 50 dif ferent hyperparameter combinations. For each of the 50
hyperparameter combinations, a model is fit on the four partitions, and its performance is assessed on
the fifth partition. The AUC ROC (area under the curve receiver operating characteristics) curve and
overall accuracy of the model are computed (please refer to Chapter 9  on logistic regression, which
provides a detailed description of interpreting AUC ROC values for a model).
We then pick the best hyperparameter combination.
The analysis reveals that the best hyperparameter combinations are the following: the number of
predictors randomly sampled at each split when a tree is created = 5, the number of trees contained in
a random forest = 69, and the minimum number of data points in a node that is required for the node to
be split further = 31.
12.6.4 Testing the Performance of Our Random Forest Model
We fit the model using the best hyperparameter combination on the entire training set and then
validate its performance on the test data. The accuracy and ROC values ( Table 12.2 ), along with the
confusion matrix for the test data ( Table 12.3 ), are reported.
12.6.4.1  Accuracy and ROC V alues
.metric .estimator .estimate .config
accuracy binary 0.8223553 Preprocessor1_Model1
roc_auc binary 0.9076335 Preprocessor1_Model1
 No Yes
No 329 16
Yes73 83
The results show that the accuracy is 82.2%, and the AUC is 0.908. Given the imbalance in levels of
the outcome variable and the fact that the minority level (when the products were backordered) is more
important for the prediction task, we need to estimate the sensitivity as well as the specificity of this
prediction.
12.6.4.2  Confusion Matrix, Sensitivity , and Specificity
A quick recap from Chapter 9  on logistic regression explains the confusion matrix. Let’ s work with the
following example to understand the process of calculating sensitivity and specificity .
 Truth
Prediction NoYes
No iiii
Yes iiiv
Given the confusion matrix in Table 12.4 , sensitivity and specificity are as follows:
Sensitivity=iv
iii+ivandSpecificity=i
i+ii
Intuitively , sensitivity is the true positive rate and represents the ability of our model to correctly classify
products that were backordered. Specificity is the true negative rate and represents the ability of our
model to correctly classify products that were not backordered. If sensitivity of our model is low , then
we will not be able to identify ahead of time products that are likely to be backordered. On the other
hand, if specificity is low , then we will end up overordering products that are less likely to be
backordered. For our model, sensitivity is 83
83+16=0.838, and specificity is 329
329+73=0.818.
12.6.4.3  Role of Downsampling
In the preceding analysis, we used downsampling  to handle the issue of class imbalance. This
downsampling method sampled rows from training data in such a way that the majority level (i.e., when
the products were not backordered) is sampled less. But let’ s check how the results would change if
we didn’t downsample. The results when downsampling is not used are represented in Table 12.5 ,
along with the confusion matrix in Table 12.6 .
.metric .estimator .estimate .config
accuracy binary 0.8602794 Preprocessor1_Model1
roc_auc binary 0.9038896 Preprocessor1_Model1
 No Yes
No 393 61
Yes9 38
We notice that both accuracy and AUC values are high and comparable to the earlier analysis when
we did downsampling. However , when we estimate sensitivity and specificity , we observe a very
different picture. Without downsampling, sensitivity is 38
38+61=0.384, and specificity is
393
393+9=0.978. There is a big drop in sensitivity from 0.838 to 0.384 and an increase in specificity
from 0.818 to 0.978. This shows that in the absence of downsampling, our model is not able to
identify products that will eventually be backordered. Downsampling addresses this weakness, and the
cost we pay is a drop in specificity . Downsampling ensures that without compromising on AUC and
accuracy values, we can make sensitivity and specificity very comparable. Note that downsampling is
one of the many subsampling methods that are available in analysis packages (see
www .tidymodels.org/learn/models/sub-sampling/ for other subsampling methods that can be used).
12.7 BUSINESS INSIGHTS AND SUMMARY
In this chapter , we examined backorders, a major supply chain topic that can cause multiple issues
such as dissatisfaction, reduced purchase probability , and reduced profitability . In order to predict
potential backorder issues, we used random forests to build a predictive model. Random forests
belong to the larger set of decision tree models that are sometimes preferred over opaque predictive
models because they allow some transparency about model working. They also are preferred since
they have the ability to work well with dif ferent types of categorical and continuous predictor variables,
multicollinear data, and outliers.
The random forest model includes 16 predictor variables to predict whether or not a product is likely to
be backordered. Since we relied on a categorical variable ( yes vs. no) as the outcome variable, we use
a confusion matrix to examine the accuracy , specificity , and sensitivity of the random forest model. W e
also learned that products that are likely to be backordered form a smaller proportion of the dataset
than those that will not be backordered. W e then understood how the downsampling method can be
used to address the issue of imbalanced data. In addition, we discussed how we can check for
whether the accuracy of the model is changed because of downsampling.
12.8 IMPLEMENTATION USING R: BACKORDER PREDICTION
The outcome variable was whether the product went on backorder or not. The random forest was
provided with 16 predictor variables such as the following:
went_on_backorder = the outcome variable of whether a product was backordered or not and
could take the value of yes or no
national_inv = indicates the current level of inventory
lead_time = measures the transit time for the product
in_transit_qty = indicates how much of the product is currently in transit
forecast_3_month, forecast_6_month, forecast_9_month = three dif ferent predictors capturing the
sales forecast for the coming 3, 6, and 9 months
sales_1_month, sales_3_month, sales_6_month, sales_9_month = four variables indicating sales
of the product in the last 1, 3, 6, and 9 months
min_bank = the minimum amount of product that is recommended to keep in stock
pieces_past_due = captures whether any parts are overdue from the supplier
perf_6_month_avg, perf_12_month_avg = two variables representing the product performance in
the past 6 and 12 months
local_bo_qty = captures the amount of orders overdue
deck_risk, ppap_risk = two dif ferent types of risk in delivery represented in a binary form of yes
and no
We first read in the data and the libraries such as readxl ,6 tidymodels ,7 dplyr ,8 ranger ,9 and
themis .10
After loading the required packages, we import the data and check the class of nonnumeric variables.
We want to ensure that nonnumeric variables such as deck_risk , ppap_risk , and
went_on_backorder  are categorical variables and will be recognized as factor  by R.
set.seed(12345)
library(readxl)
library(tidymodels)
library(dplyr)
library(ranger)
library(themis)
library(ggplot2)
library(doParallel)
 
back_order_data <-read.csv(url
("http://data.mishra.us/files/chapter_decision_uncertainty/backorder.csv"))
 
sapply(back_order_data,class)
##national_inv                           
lead_timein_transit_qty forecast_3_month
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##forecast_6_month forecast_9_month sales_1_month sales_3_month
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##sales_6_month sales_9_month min_bank pieces_past_due
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##perf_6_month_avg perf_12_month_avg local_bo_qty deck_risk
##                    "numeric"                     "numeric"                     "integer"                     "character"
##                         ppap_risk went_on_backorder
##                    "character"                     "character"
Since these categorical variables are appearing as characters, we convert them into factors and check
again their class assignment.
back_order_data <- as.data.frame(unclass(back_order_data),
                                                                        stringsAsFactors = TRUE)
sapply(back_order_data,class)
##national_inv lead_time in_transit_qty forecast_3_month
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##forecast_6_month forecast_9_month sales_1_month sales_3_month
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##sales_6_month sales_9_month min_bank pieces_past_due
##                    "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"                     "integer"
##perf_6_month_avg perf_12_month_avg local_bo_qty deck_risk
##                    "numeric"                     "numeric"                     "integer"                     "factor"
##ppap_risk went_on_backorder
##                    "factor"                     "factor"
As we discussed earlier , backorder data tend to have a class imbalance, where the number of items
that were backordered is proportionately less than the number of items that were not backordered.
Let’s check this in our data through a simple plot, shown in Figure 12.6 .
ggplot(back_order_data, aes(went_on_backorder))+
   xlab("Backorder")+ylab("Number of data points")+
   geom_bar()+
   theme_minimal()
The plot shows that items that were backordered (i.e., when the outcome variable
went_on_backorder = yes) represented approximately 1
5 of the data. This makes
went_on_backorder = no the majority level (also referred to as majority class) and
went_on_backorder = yes a minority level. It is necessary to use a sampling method that provides
appropriate representation to minority level.
As the first step to build a model to predict backorder , we split the data into train and test groups. Let’ s
use 75% data for training and 25% for testing the model.
backorder_split <- initial_split(back_order_data, strata =
went_on_backorder,
 prop = 0.75)
backorder_train <- training(backorder_split)
backorder_test <- testing(backorder_split)
Next we define the model formulation in recipe  and indicate that went_on_backorder  is the
outcome variable and all other variables are predictors.
To handle the issue of class imbalance, we use step_downsample() . This function samples rows
from training data in such a way that the majority level (i.e., went_on_backorder = no) is sampled
less. This increases the proportion of the minority level (i.e., went_on_backorder = yes) in model
training. However , it is important to note that such undersampling does not occur in the test data,
which ensures that model performance is tested in data that closely represent the real world (i.e.,
where one class is overrepresented). under_ratio = 1.5  implies that majority levels will have at
most 1.5 times more rows than minority levels. If we compare this situation to our base situation when
no sampling is applied, we will have majority level with 4 times as many rows as minority levels.
backorder_recipe <- recipe(went_on_backorder ~ ., data =
backorder_train)%>%
    step_downsample(went_on_backorder,under_ratio = 1.5)
Using rand_forest(),  we specify the random forest algorithm and also the hyperparameters such
as mtry  (the number of predictors randomly sampled at each split when a tree is created), trees  (the
number of trees contained in a random forest), and min_n  (the minimum number of data points in a
node that is required for the node to be split further). tune()  specifies that each hyperparameter
needs to be tuned though grid search. set_engine("ranger")  specifies that our computational
engine is ranger , a fast implementation of random forests. Since our outcome variable is categorical
(yes vs. no), set_mode("classification")  specifies that our model type is a classification
model.
model_backorder <- rand_forest(
     mtry = tune(),
     trees = tune(),
     min_n = tune()) %>%
     set_mode("classification") %>%
      set_engine("ranger")
 
backorder_folds <- vfold_cv(backorder_train, v = 5)
Next, we aggregate the recipe and model using workflow(). add_model  adds the
model_backorder  specified in the last step with backorder_recipe , which contains information
about predictor and outcome variables and dummy coding.
backorder_wf <- workflow() %>%
    add_model(model_backorder) %>%
    add_recipe(backorder_recipe)
We next specify the cross-validation process using vfold_cv(). V = 5  specifies that there will be
five partitions of the training dataset and that each hyperparameter combination’ s performance will be
assessed using this cross-validation procedure. doParallel:: registerDoParallel(cores =
10) registers that 10 cores will be used for parallel execution of the model. W e can change the values
of the cores depending on the computational resources available.
grid = 50  in tune_grid()  specifies that 50 dif ferent hyperparameter combinations should be
created. resamples = backorder_folds  uses cross-validation specified in vfold_cv()  and
helps to avoid overfitting the training data. For each of the 50 combinations of hyperparameters, a
model will be fit on the four partitions, and its performance will be assessed on the fifth partition.
backorder_folds <- vfold_cv(backorder_train, v = 5)
doParallel::registerDoParallel(cores = 10)
backorder_tune <-
     backorder_wf %>%
     tune_grid(
            resamples = backorder_folds,
            grid = 50
     )
We use select_best("roc_auc")  to pick the best hyperparameter combination.
best_model <- backorder_tune %>%
                    select_best("roc_auc")
 
best_model
## # A tibble: 1 × 4
##                     mtrytrees min_n                    .config
##<int> <int> <int>                    <chr>
## 1                                  5                             69                             31Preprocessor1_Model20
The analysis reveals that the best hyperparameter combination is mtry  = 5, tree  = 69, and min_n  =
31. Now we will use these hyperparameter values to update the workflow using
finalize_workflow . finalize_workflow  adds the best model to the workflow backorder_wf
created earlier . This gives us the final_workflow  that captures all the information about the model,
hyperparameters, outcome variable, and predictors.
final_workflow <-
   backorder_wf %>%
   finalize_workflow(best_model)
We fit the model using the best hyperparameter combination on the entire training set and then
validate its performance on the test data. last_fit  helps us accomplish this. split =
backorder_split  specifies that backorder_split  contains information about the test and train
split performed earlier . Using collect_metrics , we report the accuracy and ROC AUC values.
Finally using conf_mat(),  we produce a confusion matrix.
final_fit <-
    final_workflow %>%
    last_fit(split = backorder_split)
 
final_fit %>%
    collect_metrics()
## # A tibble: 2 × 4
##.metric .estimator .estimate .config
##<chr> <chr>                                 <dbl><chr>
## 1accuracy binary                                 0.822Preprocessor1_Model1
## 2roc_auc binary                                 0.908Preprocessor1_Model1
final_fit %>%
    collect_predictions()%>%
    conf_mat(truth = went_on_backorder, estimate = .pred_class)
##                          Truth
##Prediction                    NoYes
##No 329 16
##Yes                     7383
The results show that the accuracy is 82.2% and AUC is 0.908. Given the imbalance in levels of the
outcome variable and the fact that the minority level (i.e., went_on_backorder = yes) is more
important for the prediction task, we estimate sensitivity as well as specificity of this prediction. W e use
Table 12.4  and the formula for sensitivity and specificity defined earlier for our calculations.
For our model, sensitivity is 83
83+16=0.838, and specificity is 329
329+73=0.818.
12.9 UNDERSTANDING THE CHAPTER
1. Given a dataset where instances of backorders are vastly outnumbered by regular orders,
hyperparameter tuning in Random Forest, such as the number of trees or minimum data points
per node, can be used. How might adjusting these parameters specifically aid or not aid in
improving prediction accuracy for the minority class (backorders)?
2. Consider a predictive modeling task involving a Random Forest classifier . Explain the role and
significance of employing k-fold cross-validation (CV) in the model evaluation process. How does
k-fold CV work, and in what ways does it attempt to provide a robust estimate of the model’ s
performance? Moreover , discuss the trade-of fs involved in choosing a specific k value (e.g., k = 5
vs. k = 10).
3. Decisions that are made with some information missing are called which of the following?
a. Risky decisions
b. Decisions under certainty
c. No decision can be made
d. Binary decisions
4. From the options provided, which are features of decisions made under uncertainty? (Choose all
that apply .)
a. Weighing the risks of making the decision versus the benefits of the decision
b. Weighing the risks versus the costs of making the decision
c. Weighing the benefits of the decision versus profits from the sales
d. Evaluating existing options versus new ones
5. Which of the following statements is true about the bullwhip ef fect?
a. It occurs when a small change in demand is overestimated, resulting in oversupply .
b. It occurs when a small change in supply is underestimated.
c. It occurs when demand matches supply .
d. It occurs when inflation causes demand to fall.
6. For decision trees, the metric used to find which variable is a better classifier is which of the
following?
a. Gini impurity
b. Coef ficient of determination
c. Variance inflation factor (VIF)
d. Cophenetic correlation coef ficient
7. Which of the following statements about bagging is false ?
a. Bagging is bootstrap aggregation.
b. Bagging involves sampling with replacement.
c. Bagging involves sampling without replacement.
d. Bagging helps build diverse trees.
8. Which of the following statements about downsampling is false ?
a. It addresses the issue of data imbalance.
b. It allows the model to better learn the features of the minority class.
c. It severely reduces accuracy of the model.
d. It slightly decreases specificity but improves sensitivity significantly .
9. Let’s assume that we are using a decision tree to find out which predictor variable(s) can better
classify the outcome variable: whether or not customers will buy a product. Given the following
Gini impurity values for the three predictor variables—Predictor A = 0.55, Predictor B = 0.24, and
Predictor C = 0.76—which of the following options would be considered the optimal classifier of
the buy/no buy decision?
a. Predictor A
b. Predictor B
c. Predictor C
d. Both Predictor A and Predictor C
ENDNOTES
1. Heath, Chip, and Amos Tversky , “Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice
Under Uncertainty ,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty  4, no. 1 (1991): 5–28.
2. Fischhof f, Baruch, and Alex L. Davis, “Communicating Scientific Uncertainty ,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences  111, Suppl. 4 (2014): 13664–13671.
3. IBM Corporation, “Scientific and Technical Report: Backorder Prediction,” for Defense Logistics
Agency Research and Development (Contract No. SP4701-20-C-0052), submitted February 26, 2021,
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1141471.pdf.
4. Bhan, Hyung Sup, and Eric T. Anderson, “Multiyear Impact of Backorder Delays: A Quasi-
experimental Approach,” Marketing Science  22, no. 2 (2022): 314–335.
5. The data for the analysis is a subset of data adopted from Santis et al. (2017). It was made available
as a Kaggle competition and is posted at https://github.com/rodrigosantis1/backorder_prediction.
Santis, Rodrigo B., Eduardo Pestana de Aguiar , and Leonardo Goliatt, “Predicting Material Backorders
in Inventory Management Using Machine Learning,” Fourth IEEE Latin American Conference on
Computational Intelligence, Arequipa, Peru (2017).
6. Wickham, Hadley , and Jennifer Bryan, “readxl: Read Excel Files,” R package version 1.4.3 (July 6,
2023), https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=readxl.
7. Kuhn, Max, et al., “T idymodels: A Collection of Packages for Modeling and Machine Learning Using
tidyverse Principles” (2020), https://www .tidymodels.org.
8. Wickham, Hadley , Romain François, Lionel Henry , and Kirill Müller , “dplyr: A Grammar of Data
Manipulation,” R package version 1.1.3 (September 3, 2023), https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=dplyr .
9. Wright, Marvin N., and Andreas Ziegler , “ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High
Dimensional Data in C++ and R,” Journal of Statistical Software  77, no. 1 (2017): 1 ‒ 17,
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v077.i01.
10. Hvitfeldt, Emil, “themis: Extra Recipes Steps for Dealing With Unbalanced Data,” R package
version 1.0.0 (2022), https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=themis.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The figure consists of images from left to right as follows: image for human, house, industry and
vehicles for construction. Above human is the description CUST OMER DEMAND INCREASE; above
house is the description RET AILER OVERORDERING; above industry is the description OVER
MANUF ACTURING; above the vehicle is the description SUPPL Y. In the figure, from left to right is a
dotter wave enclosing the image and the description is present above each peak.
Back to Figure
The figure has a horizontal line on the left and above the line is a vertical line. On the left of the line are
four circular nodes of which first three are grey and the last is black in colour and this region is labeled
Low. On the right are five nodes of which first four are black and the last is grey in color and this region
is labeled High. The left image is labeled Forecasted Sales at the bottom. On the right is an image with
a horizontal line and vertical line above the horizontal line labeled Transit Time. On the left is the region
Low with five circular nodes of which first two nodes are grey and last three nodes are black. On the
right is the region for high with four nodes of which first two nodes are black and last two nodes are
grey.
Back to Figure
The figure has two images. On the top is an image for Forecasted Sales, which has a horizontal line
and a vertical dotted line on the top. The left side is a region for Low with three grey nodes on the left
and a black node on the right, and on the right is the region for high with four black nodes on the left
and a grey node on the right. At the bottom is the equation Weighted Average Impurity  = (5/9) 0.32 +
(4/9) 0.375 = 0.34. On the top left is the 1−(1/4)2−(3/4)2 = 0.375 and on the right is the equation 1–
(4/5)2−(1/5)2 = 0.32. At the bottom is an image for Transit Time, which has a horizontal line and a
vertical dotted line on the top. The left side is a region for Low with two grey nodes on the left and
three black node on the right, and on the right is the region for high with two blacks nodes on the left
and two grey node on the right. At the bottom is the equation Weighted Average Impurity  = (5/9) 0.48 +
(4/9) 0.5 = 0.48. On the top left is the equation 1−(2/5)2−(3/5)2 = 0.48 and on the right is the equation
1–(2/4)2−(2/4)2 = 0.5.
Back to Figure
The figure is a flow diagram consisting of rectangular blocks and circular nodes in the box. On top is a
block with four black nodes on the top and five grey nodes at the bottom. On the left is a block labeled
Low with a black node on the top and three grey nodes at the bottom. This block is again divided into
two blocks labeled Low on the left and High on the right, and the term Transit Time is at the center . On
the left is a block with a black node on the top and two grey nodes on the right. On the right is a block
for high with four black nodes on the top and a grey node at the bottom. This block is divided as Low
with two black nodes on the left and High on the right with two black nodes on the top and a grey node
at the bottom and at the center is the term Transit Time.
OceanofPDF .com
