CHAPTER 9
Automating Internal Controls Assessment
RECENTLY, PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (PWC) settled two major
high‐profile malpractice lawsuits in the UK. In the two cases (MF Global
and Taylor Bean & Whitaker), the allegations against PwC indicated that
the plaintiffs expected the audit firm to go beyond the management
assertions and include management decision‐making in the scope of the
audit. Another firm, travel company Thomas Cook, was also audited by
PwC between 2007 and 2016. Between 2017 and the collapse of Thomas
Cook in 2019, Ernst & Young (EY) took over as the auditors. Upon
investigation it was discovered that PwC provided remuneration advice to
Thomas Cook, and that while both firms, PwC and EY, had information
about the deep problems facing Thomas Cook, both gave clean audit reports
to Thomas Cook. Commenting on audit failures, Bob Moritz, global
chairman of PwC, said, “The expectations of the market is above the
regulatory requirement. When big failures happen, it is not necessarily an
audit failure. The controls might be appropriate, but the continuation of the
business, its financial position and long‐term sustainability can still be in
question” (Kinder, 2019).
Would it be possible for PwC and EY to gain deeper insights about
their clients' material weaknesses in internal controls, even before an
audit is launched?
Is it possible for PwC to develop greater insights into the business
operations of a firm?
How can management, board, and the audit committee receive
continuous evaluation of audit controls?
How can new and emerging risks be identified and mitigated?
Can audit expand its scope without incurring greater cost?
Answers to these and many other similar questions greatly depend upon the
automation strategy of internal controls. In this chapter we develop a

comprehensive strategic approach to automate internal controls assessment
and audit.
AUTOMATING INTERNAL CONTROLS
ASSESSMENT
Unlike the inherent risk, which is embedded in the strategic choices made
by the firm due to its business model, industry, etc., the internal controls
risk is a function of actions of management teams and boards. In 1993, the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO) presented a framework, which has become the standard for internal
controls. COSO defined internal control as (COSO, 2013):
Internal control is a process, effected by an entity's board of directors,
management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following
three categories:
Reliability of financial reporting.
Effectiveness and efficiency of operations.
Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
The COSO standard is based upon three objectives – effectiveness and
efficiency of operations, reliable financial reporting, and compliance with
laws and regulations. This means that the controls exist to achieve the three
objectives. The first objective of effectiveness and efficiency of operations
is based upon the corporate objectives as determined by the board and the
senior leadership teams and constitute the primary goals that the firm must
achieve to fulfill its strategy. The second objective of reliable financial
reporting is based upon the assertions made by the firm and the numbers
and disclosures reported about the financial performance of the firm. The
third objective aims to ensure that the firm abides by the laws and
regulations applicable to its business and industry.
For each objective, internal controls are built with the following five
components: (1) control environment, (2) risk assessment, (3) control
activities, (4) monitoring, and (5) information and communication. Each of

the components is supported by principles and, as of 2013, 17 principles are
part of the framework.
At this point it is important to note that audit automation can be viewed as a
combination of tool‐driven (where auditors don't rely upon any human‐
provided information) and human‐based evidence collection. Auditees
provide information in the form of data requests, access to systems and
information, and responses to specific informational requests in the form of
reports, questions and answers, forms, etc. Automated tools do not rely
upon human‐provided information and instead they directly access evidence
from the source such as data, the databases, and the applications. Human‐
based evidence collection relies upon surveys and questionnaires. Artificial
intelligence (AI) has a role to play in both areas and while this chapter
primarily focuses upon the tools, the human‐centric surveys and
questionnaires automation involves the ability to generate and analyze
surveys and questionnaires. We will cover human surveys and
questionnaires in a following chapter.
Previous studies using AI methods of self‐organizing maps (SOMs) based
clustering techniques have suggested that internal controls form a complex
nexus of capabilities where a firm may have one or more strong
components (e.g., control activities and monitoring) but not all areas.
Furthermore, firms may have strong components for one objective but not
all three (Länsiluoto et al., 2016). Recall that there are three objectives:
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, reliable financial reporting, and
compliance with laws and regulations. To design an automated system, our
strategy needs to cover all three COSO objectives and the related five
components.
When designing an automated internal control system, our broad strategy is
as follows:
Approach the problem as an integrated interaction of various agents
(both deterministic and stochastic).
Use a variety of technologies, including process mining, machine
learning, RPA, and expert systems.
Check for internal control weaknesses that are embedded in the design
of the client firm and hence create an environment ripe for errors and

frauds, and to predict if a fraudulent activity is taking place.
Use integrated internal controls system to perform continuous
assessment.
Apply integrated internal controls system to create an exhaustive
assessment (i.e., the entire population is analyzed vs. a sample).
Evolve and grow the system with business.
FIGURE 9.1 Automation of Internal Controls Evaluation
Automated risk assessment is composed of three areas: audit risk
evaluation, inherent risk evaluation, and internal controls evaluation. Audit
risk is a function of inherent risk, controls risk, and detection risk. In the
previous chapter we covered the inherent risk. Inherent risk is the risk that
exists in the absence of any internal controls. Internal controls risk happens
when a firm does not have proper internal controls to manage and control
the inherent risks. The lack of controls can be due to a firm's practices or
design. It can happen intentionally or unintentionally. Internal controls can
be evaded, overridden, or bypassed when management engages in fraud.
Thus, while inherent risk is embedded in the nature of the business, internal
controls risk is very much a product of how a firm is managed. When
auditors observe gaps in internal controls, they are supposed to increase
their substantive procedures to reduce or minimize the chances of
misstatement.

As shown in Figure 9.1, to automate the internal controls evaluation, we
follow the COSO model and break it down into five capability areas of
automated environment evaluation, automated risk assessment, automated
control activities assessment, automated monitoring assessment, and
automated information and communications evaluation. Each of the areas is
automated with various agents that work in a coordinated and collaborative
manner to achieve total automation.
AUTOMATED CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
The principles of control environment (Figure 9.2) are
The organization demonstrates a commitment to integrity and ethical
values.
FIGURE 9.2 Automated Environment Evaluation
The board of directors demonstrates independence from management
and exercises oversight of the development and performance of
internal control.

Management establishes, with board oversight, structures, reporting
lines, and appropriate authorities and responsibilities in the pursuit of
objectives.
The organization demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop, and
retain competent individuals in alignment with objectives.
The organization holds individuals accountable for their internal
control responsibilities in the pursuit of objectives.
The assessment of control's environment is an inquiry about the patterns of
human values and actions. For example, the word “organization” in the first
principle implies there are one or more humans who demonstrate
commitment to integrity and ethical values. Commitment is a cognitive
construct and manifests via human communications and actions. At this
time, we do not have reliable technology to observe what transpires in
people's minds, but we can observe patterns about humans and human
behavior that can provide us information about their mental or cognitive
constructs. For example, speech, choice of words, gestures, and body
language (including physiological information) can give us clues about the
cognitive constructs. These could be general – or specific to a domain. For
example, a general assessment can reveal the personality of a person and
can be classified as aggressive versus passive. A specific assessment will
search for speech (verbal, written) for values.
Thus, designing a system to assess the controls environment will be
composed of:
An agent that gauges the cognitive constructs of management teams
(values, ethics, personalities, integrity, and others).
An agent that gauges the cognitive constructs of management teams
and boards specific to the task structure (e.g., values or personality
types to function during a specific challenge for a firm or for the
specific objective of financial reporting).
An agent that determines if the board has undertaken the responsibility
of the oversight, structures, responsibilities, and authorities.
An agent that determines that Board separation with the management
team, and exercises oversight over the development and performance

of internal controls.
An agent that measures and provides feedback on the firm's
commitment to attract, develop, and retain competent individuals.
An agent that evaluates accountability.
The above agents, once trained, form the integrated control environment
system.
Integrity, Ethics, Personality, and Values
This system was explained in the audit preplanning chapter. We will
reexamine it here from an internal (vs. external) system perspective. The
auditor has access to significantly more documents internally than
analyzing a company from the outside. In today's world, pictures, voice, and
video data can also be requested and obtained. The core version of this
system is natural language processing, which analyzes the written
communications of the management team and the board members to search
for words that signify integrity, ethics, values, and personality. As
previously mentioned, this approach has been deployed to study the fraud
risk from linguistic and vocal patterns of earnings calls (Throckmorton et
al., 2015) as well as from documents (Management's Discussion and
Analysis (MD&A) section of the Form10‐K) (Humpherys et al., 2011). The
agent is expected to evaluate how much of management and board
communication is applied to values and ethics. The input documents used
for these analyses may include reports, messages, board meeting minutes,
emails, and other communications. Using that as input, a classification
engine is deployed that, based upon words, evaluates the presence, depth,
and frequency of ethics and integrity‐related discussions in the normal
course of business operations.
Another, more complicated, way is to get data from communications of
leaders of a firm that engaged in fraud and study the patterns of their
expression versus the patterns of the firms that provided proper returns and
met the fiduciary obligations.

Board of Directors
The board documents and emails, including the minutes from the audit
committee meetings, are analyzed to determine the presence of discussions,
guidance, directives, and references to ethics, values, and integrity. The
same can be done to assess the references to internal controls. This reveals
the instances where the references to the internal controls were made. The
email analysis also reveals the communications flow, authority, and the
nature of relationship in the organization.
The features used for email can be composed of metadata of emails, number
of emails, headers, text, attachment or no attachment, signed emails,
forwarded, replied to, cc'd, blind copied, and other features related to
frequency of emails.
Management Philosophy and Operating Style
We briefly touched upon this area in a previous chapter where our model
was based upon external data. Here we use the internal data to evaluate
management philosophy and operating style. Once again natural language
processing can give us an excellent start to understand the management
philosophy and operating style.
Management philosophy and style can be observed by the language used by
the management team, the social networks within the organization, and the
company culture. HR files, court documents, and websites such as
Glassdoor provide excellent data for modeling. Using machine learning,
your goal is to train your algorithm to classify the culture of a firm in
various classes. This can be viewed as a problem of classifying the
management team into various buckets of operating styles, management
philosophies, and management models. For instance, you can determine if
the management style is authoritarian or collaborative, closed versus open,
delegation centric versus empowerment based. Employee behavior in
organizations can be predicted by deploying machine learning and data
mining textual information such as emails (Straub et al., 2016).
Organizational Structure
The organizational structure assessment comes from multiple angles. The
analytical capability is systematically built by layering the following

capabilities:
The analyzer for organizational structure: this utility looks at the
organizational job descriptions and classifies employees into internal
controls specific roles. The data mined are the job descriptions,
departments names, people, titles, etc. A separate analysis of
organization can also show power flows, influence, and informal social
links (Fire and Puzis, 2016)
The analyzer also looks at the chart versus actual authority structure.
The chart authority structure is as represented in the organizational
charts and subject to the reporting relationships. The actual authority
structure is determined based upon analyzing the social networks from
emails, texts, and other information. The social hierarchy can be
determined from machine learning by analyzing the emails (Rowe et
al., 2007).
Financial Reporting Competencies
The financial reporting competencies can be obtained by understating the
educational background, experience, and type of education.
The training data set for competency includes the typical HR data, as well
as data from resumes, LinkedIn, and other social media data. It also
includes data from the number of publications by the person, involvement
in various professional societies, trainings, and certifications.
This artifact can be designed two ways. The first approach is to use HR data
from a larger data set (which might include data from multiple companies)
and have a human apply labels to the data. The label in this case will be
applied to learn the competence levels for a position. Factors such as years
on the job, educational background, experience, etc., will be the input data
set. Valuable information can be extracted from resumes (Reza and Zaman,
2017). The ‘y’ or output variable will be competent versus incompetent for
a given job.
The second and more interesting artifact uses the data set of input variables
including experience, years on the job, educational background from an
actual data set of frauds and failure in that position. While interesting, it

will be hard to reconstruct a data set for training purposes since it will be
hard to pinpoint the blame for a failure.
Authority and Responsibility
Authority and responsibility are assessed by using various intelligent
automation technologies. We are trying to assess whether management
assigned the responsibility of internal controls appropriately and the
employees were given the appropriate controls and authority to ensure that
internal controls are in place and effective. There are several ways to assess
that from the machine learning perspective.
The first is to have an agent that uses the human resources data to
understand the job responsibilities. The data collection can also extend to
the annual employee review and evaluation forms that typically contain
more detailed accounts of actual work undertaken by employees. In
addition, emails and communications can also be used as the data input. The
model uses natural language processing to evaluate if, given the role of the
individual, his or her responsibility structure includes references to
position‐specific internal controls. Notice that in this assessment, we are
only evaluating the environment and not the activities. Therefore, our focus
remains on studying the environment of the organization.
While responsibility is assessed using the above, analyzing authority is a
whole different ballgame. Authority manifests in enabling a manager or
employee to conduct themselves in the proper manner, not enforcing
improper or unnecessary constraints, assuring employees that there will no
negative consequences when employees file a complaint or become a
whistleblower.
Authority is a function of being able to act upon what a person has been
made responsible for. In corporate systems, access is provided to
individuals by a workflow that records the person who authorized the
access. Logs from that system can show if the authorization is being done at
the right level and being done by the person who has the authority to do it,
or by someone higher up in the organization, or by more than one person.
The culture can provide an indirect proxy for authority assessment. More
authoritative leaders will be less inclined to allow people to function
independently, even when it comes to such an important role as internal

controls. Finally, internal emails, meeting notes, and communications
provide excellent data for assessing the level of authority key employees
have. In advanced settings both video and speech can be used to study the
cultural dynamics of a firm. To accomplish that level of automation, process
mining and machine learning are used, and their applications are explained
later in this chapter.
Human Resource Policies and Practices
Large data sets are available and can be mined in human resources (Jia et
al., 2018). The objective of control environment assessment with respect to
HR is to determine whether the department is aware of the underlying
concepts of separation of duties, internal controls, and hiring the right talent
to mitigate the risks. The policies and practices of HR can be analyzed
using natural language processing and the usage of key terms (separation of
duties, etc.) can be assessed to develop insights into HR capabilities.
Similar concepts, as discussed above, are applied to determine the
capability and contribution of the HR department in supporting stronger
internal controls.
AUTOMATED RISK ASSESSMENT
Automated risk assessment was extensively covered in the previous chapter
from an inherent risk perspective. We recognized that there are at least four
automated methods to explore risk in an organization. The first method
focused on the account‐ and assertion‐specific risk identification and
management. The three remaining methods, shadow/parallel accounting,
strategic objectives, and deep learning, can be used for any type of risk
management capability development. In fact, in our case, COSO framework
requires management to understand risks from the perspective of achieving
company's objectives. The COSO 2013 framework outlines the four
principles of risk assessment:
1. The organization specifies objectives with sufficient clarity to enable
the identification and assessment of risks relating to objectives.
2. The organization identifies risks to the achievement of its objectives
across the entity and analyzes the risks as a basis for determining how

the risks should be managed.
3. The organization considers the potential for fraud in assessing risks to
the achievement of objectives.
4. The organization identifies and assesses changes that could
significantly impact the system of internal control.
In this chapter we will expand on the model presented in inherent risk
evaluation and include risk assessment from an internal control perspective,
and also introduce the concept of event‐based risk assessment.
The process is composed of four levels of automation:
Level 1: Outside‐in – Get a general idea about potential material
weakness in internal controls (MWIC) by using publicly available
information. This gives auditors a sense of how risky a client situation
might turn out to be.
Level 2: Process centric – Understand the risk relationship between
processes and controls.
Level 3: Enterprise – Develop greater insights into the value chain
and business processes of the organization. This is similar to
enterprise‐based risk analysis frameworks.
Level 4: Business decisions – Auditors do not consider this to be part
of their jobs; however, as the opening case study of PwC settling two
lawsuits shows, there is a growing movement to place that
responsibility on auditors. The reasoning behind that is clear. The
economic consequences of management decisions and objectives flow
through the financial systems and the stakeholders expect auditors to
understand and evaluate such realities of business. The consequences
of management business decisions can also become the motivation
factors to conduct fraud. In other cases, management decisions impact
the future cash flows and the cost of capital of a firm and therefore
impact the valuation of many current assets.

Level 1: Outside‐In Analysis
A group of researchers wanted to explore if it is possible to identify material
weaknesses in internal controls from using publicly available external data
(Simsek et al., 2018). Looking at various companies that announced
material weakness in internal controls, the group identified financial data
from historical financial statements one year prior to the disclosure. Using
that data – data that included financial ratios such as total asset turnover,
profitability, capital intensity, size, current ratio, and operating performance
– the research team tried to predict the internal control weaknesses. After
applying various methods, the team was able to obtain 70 to 80% accuracy
in results. This means that the team was able to predict, with reasonable
accuracy, that material weakness exists in internal controls only by using
the historical financial data. A similar artifact can be deployed to identify
such weaknesses in companies.
In fact, given today's technology advances, the predictive power of such an
artifact can be significantly enhanced by adding features and using a deep
learning environment.
Level 2: Process Centric
As we move beyond our Level 1 analysis, we can go a level deeper to
determine if the primary processes in a firm carry greater risk. This
evaluation is a function of feature data obtained from historical records of
internal control problems. For instance, a data set that contains the
examples of prior misstatements or disclosures of internal control
weaknesses can be used to identify the presence of MWIC by industries,
companies, and process types. At least two types of machine learning
methods can be deployed to develop insights into process‐centric MWIC.
The first approach is similar to the one by Simsek et al., discussed in the
previous section, except that instead of using financial and operational
performance data as feature inputs, we use industries, company types,
business model descriptions, and processes to understand the likelihood of
MWIC.
The second approach borrows from methods developed in studying human
errors in accidents. The study of human errors in accidents has significant
literature. In 1998, Hollnagel authored a book titled Cognitive Reliability

and Error Analysis Method (Hollnagel, 1998). In that book he developed
three taxonomies. The first was the taxonomy of technology, in which he
pointed out the problems that can afflict machines (e.g., equipment failure,
procedure failure, interface failure). The second taxonomy was of “man,”
implying the cognitive problems that can afflict a human (e.g., planning,
execution, memory, interpretation, observation). The third taxonomy was of
the organization, including the failure points in an organization (e.g.,
training, working conditions). Hollnagel presented a Cognitive Reliability
and Error Analysis Method (CREAM), which shifted the focus from the
task characteristics and on a hypothetical inherent human error probability,
to the principle that context is the driving force behind Human Reliability
(R. Moura et al., 2015). Moura, Beer, Patelli, Lewis, and Knoll identified
the importance of the principle and expanded upon that to use a major
accidents data set, applying a clustering technique (unsupervised) to
classify the data to discover various causes of accidents. They used self‐
organizing maps (SOMs) to cluster and classify data (Moura et al., 2015;
Moura et al., 2017). The SOM technique also enables multidimensional
data to be viewed in a two-dimensional representation (Kohonen, 2013).
Similar to what Moura, Beer, Patelli, Lewis, and Knoll (2015) did,
SOM/Clustering can be applied to understand the drivers of MWIC.
Level 3: Value Chain and Enterprise Risk Relationships
We covered a risk management process in Chapter 7. By understanding the
value chain relationships and enterprise‐centric risk, we develop insights
into potential problems that may arise in situations where external parties
are involved (e.g., sales and procurement). Developing those insights helps
give auditors an idea about potential deterioration in value of assets (e.g.,
knowledge about a major customer going bankrupt will impact the AR held
by the client firm).
The enterprise risk management process is composed of the following
processes: identify risks, develop assessment criteria, assess risks, assess
risk interactions, prioritize risks, and respond to risks (Curtis and Carey,
2012). The use of AI in the risk management process automates the process
flow of risk management.

Level 4: Business Decisions Analysis
This area of risk analysis is critical to improve audit quality and to help
develop a deeper, more insightful perspective for auditors. The automation
in this case follows the standard approach of understanding the enterprise
risk. There are established methods and approaches for identifying,
measuring, and managing enterprise risks.
Technology Design
Before presenting the methodology to accomplish that goal, it is important
to understand the two types of data critical for performing the control
activity analysis. The first is the transactional data. This is the regular data
we use to perform analysis and includes data from databases such as sales,
accounting, and procurement. The second type of data, known as metadata,
is the data about the data – for example, computer's log data about
transactions. Metadata captures things like who accessed the system, when
an entry was made, or what changes took place.
Control activities review is based upon three types of analysis: data‐centric
and metadata‐centric and data + metadata‐centric. To appreciate the power
of automation, it is important to recognize that automated evaluation of
control activities ties directly to the risk review done in the previous
section, as well as actual audit procedures. Even though we presented the
total audit automation model as a linear model, a machine, unlike humans,
doesn't need the process transition nodes and can instead perform all
processes simultaneously.
Metadata‐Centric Analysis
Process‐specific analysis is a growing area of audit automation. The advent
of process‐mining technology was a transformational step for conducting
risk evaluation using event log data. Analytical methods are applied to
extract insights from the log data to understand audit‐related patterns. The
data extracted from event logs includes information about which system
was accessed, when, and by whom. This is known as the activity, routing,
and resource information. Process mining is rules‐based extraction of data.
This information is used to capture the audit evidence to determine factors
such as

Was the system accessed by the people who are authorized to do so?
Was the system accessed at odd times or near the closing period?
Was the system accessed with higher frequency at some time intervals?
Were two or more systems being accessed by a person whose
responsibilities do not allow him or her to do so due to separation of
duties?
Were systems accessed by a group of people whose hours of accessing
the system matched, however, they typically don't access systems at
the same time?
In their impressive work, Jans et al. (2013) made a strong case for using
process mining in audit and argued the value creation potential of using
process mining. They presented the following four key attributes of process
mining:
1. Process mining analyzes the entire population of data and not just a
sample.
2. Critically that data consists of meta‐data – data entered independently
of the actions of auditee – and not just data entered by the auditee.
3. Process mining allows the auditor to have a more effective way of
implementing the audit risk model by providing effective ways of
conducting the required walk throughs of processes and conducting
analytic procedures.
4. Process mining allows the auditor to conduct analyses not possible
with existing audit tools, such as discovering the ways in which
business processes are actually being carried out in practice, and to
identify social relationships between individuals.
Process mining can be used to identify processes from beginning to end –
giving a comprehensive view of how a process moves through the
company's systems and laying out the audit trail. Van der Aalst et al. (2010)
outline the capabilities of process mining as being able to provide business
provenance by ensuring traceability, process discovery by identifying

frequent patterns, and being able to compare an a priori model with the
event logs and vice versa.
Data‐Centric Analysis
Data‐centric internal control analysis refers to analyzing the transactional
data to assess internal controls and to performing actual substantive
procedures and testing. This data includes that which resides in accounting
systems and that becomes the source of information used to construct the
financial statements supplied by the management. These are the general
analysis, such as budgets, reports, business intelligence, business analytics,
and other management information reporting. In human‐led control
structures, these reports are the life‐blood of decision‐making.
In an automated world, some of that decision‐making will no longer be
performed by humans. Much of this will be discussed in the next chapter.
However, for this chapter it is important to consider that a computerized
financial system is made up of transactional data, the underlying processes
and structures, and the human who enters data or makes decisions outside
of the system. These decisions could be about how to treat a transaction, or
what/how to reconcile, or how to record an entry. But while the human
decision‐making can be considered as outside the system, since it happens
in the human mind, those decisions impact what transpires in the
computerized financial system. We, the humans, are both part of the system
and exist outside of it. As we move ahead with the AI revolution, we may
need to think differently about viewing what goes on in the human mind as
external to the system and instead include those thoughts, decisions, and
cognitive frameworks as part of the system. This broadening of the system
concept happens as cognitive frameworks and decision‐making is
transferred from human mind and embedded in the financial system.
Data + Metadata
The addition of machine learning to process mining is a great innovation for
audit. When combined, both can produce continuous, automated, and
integrated audit. Six years after proposing the use of process mining, Jans,
with another author, proposed the use of machine learning with process
mining (Jans and Hosseinpour, 2019). The idea of machine learning comes
from the fact the process mining creates an extremely large number of

exceptions. These exceptions are then interpreted by humans and marked as
“of interest” and “not of interest.” The exceptions provide a huge source of
learning data, such that the machine can learn how to classify the output of
process mining data. In fact, human‐classified data provides a perfect set of
examples needed to teach machines how to identify good versus
unacceptable patterns. Using the classification algorithms, the machine can
identify patterns and generalize its learning to recognize previously
unknown anomalous patterns.
CONTROL ACTIVITIES
Unlike the control environment assessment, which focused on the passive
factors of internal controls, control activities focus on actions and activities
related to ensuring that internal controls are implemented, and that board
and management directives are followed about internal controls. The goal
of evaluation of control activities (McNally, 2013) is to ensure that the
organization
Selects and develops control activities
Selects and develops general controls over technology
Deploys policies and procedures
The goal of intelligent automation is to automate the evaluation of the
achievement of the above three goals automatically.
Selects and Develops Control Activities
The selection and development of control activities is a function of the risks
identified. Every significant risk requires controls so that the overall goal of
ensuring that risk of material misstatement for all relevant assertions is
effectively managed. In some ways, controls serve the preventative role.
Frauds and errors should be detected and corrected before they enter the
financial system.
The selection and development of controls can be viewed as establishing a
link between each significant risk and the preventative process designed to
block fraud and error entering the financial system. This preventative

process is composed of activities that are embedded in the workflows and
business processes. For example, hiring the right people, establishing
separation of duties, developing limits on transaction sizes, implementing
approvals in the workflow, and limiting access to systems are some of the
key activities undertaken.
In the context of modernization of audit, there are two ways to determine
whether management is actively selecting and developing controls and
therefore actively engaging in control activities.
The first is the direct evidence obtained in response to the known risks
evaluation. This evidence is not based upon questionnaires but is
acquired directly (as discussed in the previous section) and it shows
whether the management has done a good job in preparing the
organization to prevent material errors and fraud finding their way into
the accounting systems.
The second is to understand the management's ability and preparation
for unknown or unanticipated emergent risks that can arise rapidly and
lead to a material event. Since the auditor's focus is primarily on the
historical information, one can question the need for including this in
the assessment. The reason for that is simple. Even if we ignore the
direct benefits for assessing the potential versus known risk‐centric
evaluation, the fact that management is engaging in understanding
potential risks is on its own an indication of management being
responsible and active in preventative response.
The model implies establishing a context‐sensitive model that offers a
relationship between risks and preventative response processes. In many
cases there will be similarities between various approaches and risks. An
assertion risk may call for a specific functional separation of duties – for
instance, in accounts payable, purchasing, and receiving – regardless of the
company. In other cases, risks may require new, customized, or creative
preventative responses. Most auditing operates with existing models, what
van der Aalst et al. calls de jure models that “describe a desired or required
way of working,” in contrast to de facto models that “aim to describe reality
with potential violations of the boundaries defined in de jure models” (van
der Aalst et al., 2011, 2010). Hence, we can assume that the de jure model

results from the knowledge of what works and what doesn't work. In this
case, they come from auditor's knowledge of a certain preventative control
being an effective mitigation to a certain specific risk. This implies that an
ontology of risks and preventative measures can be created, which
essentially can be transformed into a set of rules that can be invoked or
checked against for an audit.
The machine learning – centric automation for control activities automation
refers to two applications:
1. The application that studies new risk patterns and suggests mitigation
strategies. This can be a combination of both unsupervised (clustering)
and supervised (classification) approaches. The job of this application
is to update the existing de jure models. Whether that update happens
via learning or updating existing rules, risk‐response patterns
recognition is the core capability needed to propose and develop
effective control activities in response to emerging risk patterns.
2. The application that incorporates the above learning and compares it to
de facto situations. This is done from a combination of “metadata +
data” analysis, as discussed in the previous section. Van der Aalst et al.
clarified that concept when they said, “It is possible to promote a de
facto model to a de jure one. A comparison showing that the actual
process execution is inconsistent with the standard preexisting model
may motivate an update of the de jure model” (van der Aalst et al.,
2010). What machine learning does is to explore the inconsistency
between the de jure model and the de facto model and then if it finds
the de facto model more effective, it updates the de jure model. The
learning can happen from at least three sources: (1) historical data
from previous audits; (2) auditor (human)‐provided knowledge base
where the auditor provides examples of an effective response; and (3)
the system is designed with a critic that can simulate the risk scenarios
and critique the strategies used to prevent and counter the risks in
terms of a goal structure. This design will generally require the use of
reinforcement learning.

Selects and Develops Controls Over Technology
Control activities related to technology were addressed by van der Aalst et
al. (2011) in which they proposed the concept of an oversight system being
created to monitor another system. They clarified that a control is “an
automated task in the information system aimed at the prevention of
violations of certain business rules. These controls are strongly related to
the functions of the information system” and then cautioned that “often
business rules are generic (i.e., not bound to a specific business context).”
The process of management deploying controls over information
technology is being achieved by continuous controls monitoring (CCM).
CCM is a collection of tools that extract data from databases and scans for
separation of duties, authorizations, breaches, errors, anomalies, size limits
of transactions, etc. These controls are embedded within the technology.
Technology access controls are also important considerations. Separation of
duties can be ascertained from the reports about who logged into systems.
Ensuring that only those people who are authorized to access the systems
do so is essential for establishing a better controls environment.
The advent of AI will have three important impacts on this area. First, two
types of analysis – predictive and prescriptive – are added to the
deterministic, rule‐based anomaly detection of CCM. This means that the
system not only analyzes data from databases, it uses the data to learn about
breaches and hence predicts them and offers prescriptive remedies to
counter the threats. The second impact is that significantly larger amounts
of data can be processed and deployed in deep learning – centric
architecture. This enables detecting frauds and errors that are not easily
detectable. Third, AI's introduction will lead to control redesign and
weakening of existing controls. Intelligent systems are deployed not only by
those who are trying to protect a firm, but also by those who don't mean
well. This means that intelligent controls will be needed.
Consider the fact that our transactional (deterministic) systems have a
source of concern for us from a controls perspective – imagine the arrival of
intelligent machines in our organization. How will we manage and control
them? The advent of AI will further exacerbate the problem of controls.
This topic is covered in Chapter 18 of this book.

Deploys Policies and Procedures
The policies and procedures are scanned and using natural language
processing analyzed to determine if they comply with the risk types
identified for the client firm. For instance, frequency of key words can
classify documents into various areas of controls and determine if there was
proper coverage of each area of controls. For instance, using the Term
Frequency – Inverse Document Frequency (TF‐IDF) method, documents
can be analyzed and classified based upon importance and coverage.

example: What Is TF‐IDF? Term Frequency – Inverse
Document Frequency
TF‐IDF is a natural language processing method that is based upon
calculating the frequency of words. It has two parts, the TF part and the
IDF part. In the TF part, the algorithm calculates the number of times a
term is used in a document. For example, if you are analyzing a
document pertaining to policies and procedures, you can learn that the
words “Separation” and “Duties” were used 34 and 28 times
respectively. If the document is a total of 1000 words long, the word
frequency will be calculated as 34 divided by 1000 for Separation and
28 divided by 1000 for Duties. This gives an estimate of how many
times each term was used in a document and can provide a sense of
importance of that term in a document. In the IDF part, we calculate the
inverse document frequency by taking the whole corpus (all documents)
and identifying how many documents used the term overall. It is
calculated by taking a base 2 log of the number of documents divided
by the number of documents in which the term was used. Let us say that
there are 50 documents that make up the policy and procedures and the
terms “Separation” and “Duties” appear in 12 and 32 documents, then
log of 50/12 and 50/32 respectively will give us the inverse document
frequency. The TF‐IDF is then calculated by multiplying TF by IDF. By
using this method, we can determine the relevance of documents to
various topics. Once TF‐IDF values are determined, we can also
calculate the similarities among documents. For example, we can
estimate which documents focus on Separation of Duties – related
internal controls.
Physical Controls and Machine‐Generated Data
Physical controls are necessary to protect certain types of assets. In the past,
the controls for physical access were limited to installing cameras and
locks. With the advances in AI we now have the opportunity to make
significant improvements in the physical controls. The opportunities exist in
automated evaluation of video input to assess whether that usage of the

asset is in accordance with the expected use. The video feed can be
analyzed for misuse, theft, and intentional asset destruction. In addition to
video, other Internet of Things (IoT) data can be analyzed to determine
controls over production, inventory, warehouses, etc. Similarly, data from
trucks can be analyzed regarding travel miles, maintenance, and fleet usage
patterns.
AUTOMATED MONITORING
Monitoring refers to the management monitoring the internal control
activities on an ongoing basis. The standards require the management team
to
Conduct ongoing and/or separate evaluations.
Evaluate and communicate deficiencies: The goal of evaluation is to
ensure that management actively leads, manages, and participates in
reporting. In an automated system, the function of automated
monitoring is embedded within the machines. In the initial stages of
automation, it is expected that humans and machines will share the
monitoring responsibility but as technology moves forward, the
responsibility will shift to the machines.
Automated controls providing information about machines: The
auditors would want to see evidence that automated controls are
providing evidence about monitoring activities.
Risk simulation: Auditors should be able to simulate risk in an
environment and observe the performance of controls.
Critic: Determine if a critic exists that automatically critiques the
performance of the monitoring controls.
Business process gap analysis: Automated checks are performed for
business process gap analysis.
Budgets, variance, and scorecards.

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
The guiding principles of COSO about information and communications
emphasize that an organization must
Obtain or generate and use relevant quality information to support the
functioning of internal controls.
Internally communicate information, including objectives and
responsibilities for internal controls, necessary to support internal
controls.
Communicate with external parties regarding internal controls.
The goal of the automated internal control information and communications
systems is to constantly collect and compile actionable information about
internal controls and then disseminate it to both internal and external
parties.
The previous sections addressed several artifacts that can be deployed to
automate internal controls. These artifacts will provide information about
their own state as well as about their activities. For instance, self‐
governance can be built into the artifact and can report on factors such as
Business process
Transaction details
Other events
Data lineage
Reports generated from these can be sent to all relevant parties and an
escalation workflow can be designed.
CONTROL RISK AND NEXT STEPS
Our audit planning began with using extensive information about the firm
from external sources to develop a good analysis for risk. In some cases, the
external (outside‐in) analysis will expose the risk areas as clearly as a
flashlight exposing a point of interest in a dark room. In other cases, they

will develop our instincts and make us more aware of what lies ahead in an
engagement.
From outside‐in we moved to the internal data and systems of a firm. Our
approach became more invasive and deeper. We penetrated the shields of
obscurity and gained direct access to data. It was from that point where we
began gaining confidence in our ability to monitor and assess controls
intelligently and constantly.
With a good understanding of inherent risks and control risks, auditors can
assess the focus and extent of substantive procedures. We discuss direct
evidence collection from accounts and substantive procedures in the next
chapter.
Key Points
Internal controls testing is one of the most important objectives of
an audit. While inherent risk is usually unmanageable and is a
function of a company's business model among other things,
control risk can and should be managed.
Control risk is composed of five types of automations including
automated controls environment, automated risk assessment,
automated control activities assessment, automated monitoring
assessment, and automation information and communications
evaluation.
An audit automation plan must address all of these areas.
REFERENCES
COSO (2013) Internal Control – Integrated Framework. [online]. Available
from: https://www.coso.org/Documents/990025P-Executive-Summary-
final-may20.pdf.
Curtis, P. and Carey, M. (2012) Risk assessment in practice. COSO.
coso.org.

Fire, M. and Puzis, R. (2016) Organization mining using online social
networks. Networks and Spatial Economics, 16 (2): 545–578.
Hollnagel, E. (1998) Cognitive Reliability and Error Analysis Method.
Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Humpherys, S. L., Moffitt, K. C., Burns, M. B., Burgoon, J. K., and Felix,
W. F. (2011) Identification of fraudulent financial statements using
linguistic credibility analysis. Decision Support Systems, 50 (3): 585–
594.
Jans, M., Alles, M., and Vasarhelyi, M. (2013) The case for process mining
in auditing: Sources of value added and areas of application.
International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 14 (1): 1–20.
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.015.
Jans, M. and Hosseinpour, M. (2019) How active learning and process
mining can act as Continuous Auditing catalyst. International Journal of
Accounting Information Systems, 32 (November 2018): 44–58. Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2018.11.002.
Jia, Q., Guo, Y., Li, R., Li, Y., and Chen, Y. (2018) A conceptual artificial
intelligence application framework in human resource management.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Electronic Business
(ICEB), December, 106–114.
Kinder, T. (2019) Thomas Cook collapse will intensify UK audit debate,
PwC says. Financial Times.
Kohonen, T. (2013) Essentials of the self‐organizing map. Neural Networks,
37: 52–65. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2012.09.018.
Länsiluoto, A., Jokipii, A., and Eklund, T. (2016) Internal control
effectiveness – a clustering approach. Managerial Auditing Journal, 31
(1): 5–34.
McNally, J. S. (2013) The 2013 COSO Framework & SOX Compliance:
One approach to an effective transition. Strategic Finance. June (The
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission

(COSO)). Available from: https://www.coso.org/documents/COSO
McNallyTransition Article‐Final COSO Version Proof_5‐31‐13.pdf.
Moura, Raphael, Beer, M., Lewis, J., and Patelli, E. (2015) Learning from
accidents: Analysis and representation of human errors in multi‐attribute
events. 12th International Conference on Applications of Statistics and
Probability in Civil Engineering, ICASP 2015 (July).
Moura, R., Beer, M., Patelli, E., Lewis, J., and Knoll, F. (2015) Human
error analysis: Review of past accidents and implications for improving
robustness of system design. Safety and Reliability: Methodology and
Applications ‐ Proceedings of the European Safety and Reliability
Conference, ESREL 2014. [Online] (September), 1037–1046.
Moura, R., Beer, M., Patelli, E., Lewis, J., and Knoll, F. (2017) Learning
from accidents: Interactions between human factors, technology and
organisations as a central element to validate risk studies. Safety Science,
99: 196–214. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2017.05.001.
Reza, T. and Zaman, S. (2017) Analyzing CV/resume using natural
language processing and machine learning. BRAC University. Available
from:
http://dspace.bracu.ac.bd/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10361/9480/14101061
%2C14101171_CSE.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Rowe, R., Creamer, G., Hershkop, S., and Stolfo, S. J. (2007) Automated
social hierarchy detection through email network analysis. Joint Ninth
WebKDD and First SNA‐KDD 2007 Workshop on Web Mining and
Social Network Analysis. [Online] 109–117.
Simsek, S., Bayraktar, E., Ragothaman, S., and Dag, A. (2018) A Bayesian
approach to detect the firms with material weakness in internal control.
IISE Annual Conference and Expo 2018. 971–976.
Straub, K. M., (2016) Data mining academic emails to model employee
behaviors and analyze organizational structure. Available from:
https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/bitstream/handle/10919/71320/Straub_KM
_T_2016.pdf;sequence=1.

Throckmorton, C. S., Mayew, W. J., Venkatachalam, M., and Collins, L. M.
(2015) Financial fraud detection using vocal, linguistic and financial
cues. Decision Support Systems, 74: 78–87. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2015.04.006.
van der Aalst, W. M. P., Van Hee, K. M., Van Der Werf, J. M., and Verdonk,
M. (2010) Auditing 2.0: Using process mining to support tomorrow's
auditor. Computer, 43 (3): 90–93.
van der Aalst, W., Van Hee, K., Van Der Werf, J. M., Kumar, A., and
Verdonk, M. (2011) Conceptual model for online auditing. Decision
Support Systems, 50 (3): 636–647. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2010.08.014.
OceanofPDF.com

