from data. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a collection of arti -
ficial neurons (also known as units) that receive data as an input, and 
then logic is applied to produce an output. ANNs are frequently used 
for pattern recognition such as facial recognition in pictures and vi -
deos, speech recognition, social networks, etc., frequently accelerated 
by tensor processing. A tensor processing unit (TPU) is an application- 
specific circuit developed by Google that is used to increase processing speeds for machine learning and deep learning applications. Whereas traditional machine learning relies heavily on the guidance provided by 
human programmers, DL models use ANNs (inspired by the biolo
-
gical neural networks found in human brains) to analyze large volumes 
of data to teach itself. 
Deep learning can be used in a variety of applications, such as facial 
recognition, image classification, speech recognition, and text transla -
tion. Current applications of DL include self-driving vehicles that slow 
down as it approaches a pedestrian cross-walk, ATM machines that 
reject a counterfeit banknote, and a smartphone app that translates the image of a street sign in a foreign language (The Mathworks & 
MATLAB, 2018). 
EY uses deep learning technology to reconstruct documents (e.g., 
invoices and contracts used during an audit) that were poorly- scanned using optical recognition software (Duffy, 2019). Researcher 
Sophia Sun (2019) promotes the use of DL to support audit decision making in two key areas: information identification and judgment 
support. DL algorithms can analyze semi-structured data (e.g., text 
data from supporting documents such as invoices, contracts, etc.) 
and unstructured data (such as images, audio, and video from the 
internet, social media, etc.), which will aid in information identifi
-
cation. Further, Sun notes that the predictive performance of DL 
models is superior to classic machine learning when the volume of 
data and the number of variables is large. To maximize the use of DL 
in an audit context, Sun suggests designing and developing a data warehouse to train the algorithms to make predictions and assist 
with audit procedures. 
Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of AI that focuses on 
the interaction of computers and people using human languages. The 
Siri application on Apple’s iPhone and Amazon’s Alexa uses NLP to 
understand requests for completing a task. 10 What Accountants Need to Know 
NLP can be broken down into two types: natural language under -
standing and natural language generation. 
Natural language understanding (NLU) enables computers to un -
derstand instructions provided in human language. For example, when 
a user asks their iPhone for weather conditions by using the following voice command, “Hey Siri, what’s the latest weather?” Siri under
-
stands their command and retrieves the information by searching on the Internet. 
Natural language generation (NLG) enables computers to produce 
human language so that people can understand computers. After Siri performed a search of the latest weather, it replies with an answer such 
as the following example: “it’s currently clear and 28 degrees in 
Philadelphia. Expect partly cloudy skies starting tonight. Today’s high 
will be 33 degrees, and the low will be 23 degrees”. Siri understood that 
the user was asking it to look up the weather conditions at a specific 
location and time, and then returned the results in spoken English 
words. NLG can also convert data visualizations, such as charts and graphs, into a verbal description that can be understood by humans 
(CPA Canada & AICPA, 2019). 
The potential for using NLP in accounting is substantial, as it 
can be used to process and analyze large amounts of data. NLP has been used to analyze various textual documents related to corpo
-
rate financial performance and compliance with accounting stan -
dards and regulations (Fisher et al., 2016). Text mining uses NLP to extract meaning from textual data. Applications of NLP include 
text mining components such as semantics analysis, text classifi
-
cation, text summarization, and text translation. Additional ap -
plications include speech recognition, question-answering systems, and chatbots. 
Data Mining 
Data mining is a process of analyzing large data sets (i.e., “big data”) 
to discover previously unknown patterns or relationships. Data mining 
tools are typically applied to structured data, that is, highly formatted 
data contained in relational databases such as in an ERP system and, 
therefore, can be very helpful for accountants. 
As illustrated in Figure 1.2, data mining intersects with but is not 
considered a subfield of AI. As computer scientist Xavier Amatriain notes, “machine learning can be used for data. However, data mining can use 
other techniques on top of machine learning” (Amatriain, 2016, para. 5). What Accountants Need to Know 11 
Like machine learning, data mining relies on reading large 
amounts of data to discover patterns and arrive at conclusions. 
However, technology expert Bernard Marr identified notable dif -
ferences between data mining and machine learning. First, data mining looks for patterns that already exist in historical data, whereas ML attempts to predict future outcomes based on the given 
data. Second, the rules or patterns are unknown at the beginning of 
the data mining process, whereas the rules are programmed into the computer to understand the data with machine learning. Third, data 
mining relies on human intervention throughout the process, 
whereas much of the learning with ML is automatic. Finally, data 
mining uses an existing data set, such as a data warehouse, whereas 
ML learns from a training data set and then makes predictions using 
new data sets (Marr, n.d.). 
By using data mining techniques on general ledger transactions, ac
-
countants can potentially unlock valuable insights and improve 
decision-making. For example, auditors can use data mining to help detect fraudulent purchases or outlier transactions that require 
further investigation. Management accountants can use data mining 
to assess the financial risk of a business entity, such as “trading partners, corporate affiliates, investment partners, and takeover targets” 
(Calderon et al., 2003, p. 7). 
• Structured Data
• Text Mining (Unstructured 
Textual Data)
• Other Unstructured Data 
(Videos, Photos, Audio Files)• Expert Systems and 
Other Rules -Based 
or Fuzzy-
Based Reasoning 
Systems
• Machine Learning
• Deep LearningData and Big Data 
MiningArtiﬁcial Intelligence
Data and Big Data 
Mining with AI
Figure 1.2 Relationship between (big) data mining and AI.  12 What Accountants Need to Know 
Text Mining 
Text mining is a process of extracting information from various 
text sources (such as Word documents, PDF files, social media 
posts, emails, websites, articles, XML files, and others) to discover patterns, trends, and themes. The text found in these documents is 
typically unstructured, that is, they are not in a predefined format that 
can be analyzed through data analytics software such as IDEA or ACL. 
Text mining is performed in two steps: 1) imposing structure on the 
text data sources and then 2) using data mining techniques to extract 
relevant information (Sharda et al., 2014). 
Text mining is useful in fields that have a large amount of textual 
data, as is the case with accounting. For example, auditors review contracts, invoices, legal letters, SEC filings, earnings, conference calls, news articles, and much more. 
Professor Aldhizer (2017) of Wake Forest University suggests that 
forensic and audit practices consider using text analytics for high-risk engagements. Aldhizer notes that text analytics could be used for 
concept extraction to identify incriminating words from social media 
posts and emails. Text mining could be used to ensure proper reporting 
under lease and revenue recognition (Iowa State University, n.d.). 
Robotic Process Automation (RPA) and AI 
Although RPA is not considered a form of AI by some experts (CPA Canada & AICPA, 2019), this technology enables machines to perform 
functions usually carried out by humans. Firms are using RPA, cou
-
pled with AI capabilities, to increase productivity and performance. Thus, accountants need to understand what RPA is and how it can be combined with AI technologies. Robotic process automation (RPA) is a 
software application (robot or bot) that automates a business process by replicating the actions of humans performing tasks within digital systems, such as manipulating or transferring data. In many cases, the 
automation involves minimal coding and is typically activated by using 
a smart screen recording. Keep in mind that these robots are not 
physical steel machines found in the old science-fiction movies or tel
-
evision shows. RPA lends itself well to high-volume and repeatable tasks traditionally performed by humans. For example, RPA can be 
used to process bulk transactions, such as processing vendor invoices 
for payment. 
By using RPA, businesses can achieve increased productivity 
and accuracy at a lower cost. The exponential growth in RPA What Accountants Need to Know 13 
adoption has been facilitated by the availability of software providers 
such as UiPath, Automation Anywhere, and BluePrism. Many 
RPA providers will allow individuals to have a limited version of 
their software to begin building bots. Examples of RPA in ac -
counting include performing bank reconciliations, automating cash 
applications, and tracking accounts payable. 
Application Programming Interfaces (API) and AI 
An application programming interface (API) is a set of functions or 
rules that facilitates communication between applications, databases, and devices. An analogy to understand how an API works is a 
restaurant waiter who takes an order relays it to the kitchen and 
then returns the prepared food to the customer. APIs are like digital messengers – they allow the weather app on your phone to transmit 
and retrieve information from a third-party app such as the Weather 
Channel. As another example, APIs enable customers to purchase movie tickets through a site like Fandango by signing into their 
Facebook or Google accounts. 
APIs are used extensively by AI and ML programmers. For example, 
Google’s Prediction API provides cloud-based access to machine 
learning, natural language processing, recommendation engines, pattern 
recognition, and prediction services (Rizk, 2018). In a blog post entitled 
“Top 20 APIs You Should Know in AI and Machine Learning,” Oleksii 
Kharkovyna (2019) notes that his preferred APIs are most suitable 
for AI and ML purposes. BigML, for example, uses APIs to create data sets, models, and predictions that use ML technology. As another 
example, Anaconda Enterprise is a data science platform that uses APIs 
to deploy machine learning models. 
Best Programming Languages Accountants Should Learn 
for Artificial Intelligence Applications 
Accountants with a strong technical background in programming 
languages will be best positioned to work with data scientists in im -
plementing AI initiatives. For those do-it-yourself accountants who 
may want to customize AI technologies to solve applications, learning a programming language will be quite useful. Proficiency with popular 
open-source programming tools for AI, such as Python and R, will 
enable accountants to customize AI applications to suit the unique business needs of their firms or clients. Other tools, such as SQL and 14 What Accountants Need to Know 
