1 AI and Finance
DOI: 10.4324/9781003669357-2
1.1 Introduction
Globalization boosts financial integration1 resulting in higher resistance to
potential shocks and refining the financial system. Moreover , globalization
reduces trade barriers, increases  technological innovation, stipu lates better
education, and generates an advantageous macroeconomic environment.
Thus, financial reforms and assistance in technological innovation,
particularly financial technology , are critical for promoting financial
development, resulting in a more resourceful allocation of financial assets.
The datafication of finance stimulates the financialization of the new
economy , as financial transactions connect market participants around the
globe and data is traded within and outside the financial system.
Financial contagion and spillover outcomes are asymmetric, where
markets respond to positive and negative shocks in different ways and to
different scales. Moreover , the integration of cryptocurrency and blockchain
revolutionizes numerous industries, stimulating financial  inclusion,
transparency , and effectiveness in the advancing digital age.2 It is
characteristic that the financial industry offers the financial instruments that
are needed in any business transaction, and managing the cost of financial
instruments is diminished by the valuable use of technologies like
blockchain and AI, which in turn slashes the cost of running corporations.
Global financial markets have become gradually intertwined, and the SEC
stated that regul ators have to balance the aim of investor protect ion with the
realism of the marketplace.3
So far, the power of AI technology seems to have been tremendously
utilized by sellers, and pricing and data are central areas of policy in an AI-
centric world. AI advances the capability to predict revenue outcomes of
different policy options. Digitalization has caused faster and more effective
service delivery by many corporations. Additionally , the consequences of
digitalization for building sustainable sociotechnical systems are crucial for
new, large-scale technologies.
It is characteristic that globaliz ation instigates amplified international
competition, expansion of global markets and opportunities, along with
altering surroundings and necessities for management practi ces. Hence,
organizations desiring to stay competitive and progressive have  to adjust to
these transformations and emplo y new management tactics. In other words,
rising international interaction, fluctuations in the technological
environment via the fast advance of information technologies, and altering
consumer requests generate new challenges for organizations in a
globalized world. Thus, productive management in such circumstances
necessitates new approaches guaranteeing flexibility , innovation, and
effectiveness in the actions of or ganizations.
It has to be taken into account that the use of modern communication
and collaboratio n technologies assists businesses in preservin g operative
interaction with global partners. Thus, corporations have to advance
intercultural communication management capabilities and adjust to
different cultura l backgrounds to operate effectively in a global milieu.
Economic issues such as variations in global markets, trade agreements, and
currency fluctuations have a noteworthy influence on the financial
condition and strategies of corporations. Moreover , alterations in consumer
lifestyles mark the market state of affairs and the perception of
corporations’  products and services. It is worth stressing that climate
change, energy competence, and environmental standards are becoming
gradually signif icant for businesses in order to ensure their triumph in a
global AI era. Hence, innovation and digital transformation are vital for
corporate advancement via the employment of advanced technologies,
operative use of data and analytics, and warranting flexibility and
responsiveness to swiftly shifting market settings.
Auditing uncovers the mistakes and shortcomings of corporations and
thus spots the rightful organization of production, along with the application
of innovative technologies. Hence, an innovation audit is about
understanding the successful organization of innovation and identifying
which components are working  productively and where extra efforts and
adjustments are needed. Thus, the utilization of AI and AAI (Advanced
Artificial Intelligence) systems will allow the employment of the best
factors in achieving the best outcome . Olga T. Cherne y4 et al. argue that “It
is also necessary  to note five fundamental principles that must be observed
when conductin g an innovation audit: honesty , objectivity , professional
competence and due care, confidentiality , and professional behavior .”
The current digitization of finance encompasses privately issued digital
money and privately run digital payment systems; thus, these new
technologies challenge the central balance of the sovereign public and
private actors’  relative powers and roles in the financial system . Moreover ,
AI systems increase private financial institutions’  capability to over-
generate risk and power in the financial system, without the parallel upsur ge
in the public’ s capability to control that process; therefore, AI technologies
make financial services more competent and accessible.5 Also, AI system s
produce excessive generation and speculative misallocation of credit and
money .6 Hence, an unstable financial system influences economic and
social stability; thus, finance is a device for the geopolitical status of a
country . Kenneth Krushel7 argues that
“The influence of AI and the all-encompassing technological
age, challenges our pedagogy , challenges how we conceive
our language, our imposition of geopolitical heuristics, and
how we grasp dominion over the earth as well as our
capacities for good and ill.”
1.2 Bitcoin as Money
It has to be considered that there is no need to distinguish the character of
the transactions to assess a currency as a medium of exchange.8 A currency
being a safe store of value is the key element for a means of being money ,
which is questionable at the moment, for digital/virtual currencies.
Nakamoto9 was persuaded that the internet needed a currency that was, like
it, decentralized, protected by cryptography , and favorable for peer-to-peer
exchange. A group with pseudo-Libertarian political beliefs finds Bitcoin
attractive owing to its lack of connection to any government, adhering
openly to distrust of the world financial system, and the timing of Bitcoin’ s
introduction, corresponding to the very bottom of the global financial crisis
in 2008–2009.
Bitcoin10 is a non-fiat cryptographic electronic payment system that
claims to be the world’ s first cryptocurrency . It is a peer-to-peer, client-
based, entirely distributed curre ncy that is not based on centralized issuing
bodies being a “sovereign” to function. The value is produced by the users,
and the procedure is executed by utilizing an open-source client installed on
any computer running Windows , Mac, Linux,11 etc. In Spain, the judgment
of the Supreme Court12 20/06/2019 denied the recognition of Bitcoin as
legal tender (money) but considered it an “incorporeal asset.”
Bitcoin is a homogeneous, virtual good that is entirely identical across
all the online markets in which it is sold. The blockchain is a shared public
ledger on which the entire Bitcoin network relies. It must be considered that
network economics is a new field within the information society , and its
principle is that products and services are produced and value is added via
networks functioning on large or global scales. This is in contrast to
industrial-era economies, in which ownership of physical or intellectual
property originated from a single enterprise.13
On the one hand, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled that
Bitcoin was a virtual currency and that it could be accepted by the parties as
a non-c orporate means of payment.14 On the other hand, the Pays era
judgment15 highlights that
“the definition of electronic money , which is considered to be
any monetary value stored by electronic or magnetic means
which represents a claim on the issuer , is issued on receipt of
funds for the purpose of making payment transactions (…),
and which is accepted by a natural or legal person other than
the issuer of electronic money .”
To that extent, the Advocate General16 underlines that
“Bitcoin is not money as it does not fulfil the three functions
of money: it is not a medium of exchange, nor a store of value,
nor a unit of account. These assets are not backed or managed
by any central entity , nor is there any guarantee that they can
be exchanged for cash. They are slow , costly and cannot be
used to pay everyday bills. Its transactions are slow , costly ,
and cannot be used to pay everyday bills. It is not issued by
any central public authority , and it does not have the same
level of trust as an of ficial currency such as the euro, which is
backed by the central banks of the euro area.”
Hence, the Advocate General judges e-money to be Proton, miniCASH,
Moneo, Geldkar te, and PayPal, and so, for the Advocate General, money is
only stored in a network, the medium is “computerized” or virtual, and
Bitcoin is not electronic money . Thus, the Advocate General’ s view
disagrees with the opinions articulated by the CJEU in the Hedqvist
judgment, wher e it deems Bitco in to be a virtual currency , which is legal
money for the reason that it is understood to be within the autonomy of the
parties and what  they consider to have value, and is eventually the object of
exchange between them.
Bitcoin is differentiated from fiat money since it does not have the
agency costs of public money . John O. McGinnis17 argues that
“If Bitcoin is to grow into a more stable currency , it will need
financial intermediaries to do so…Thus, even for a
cryptocurrency like Bitcoin that should not itself be regulated,
there is this paradox: to succeed, these structures currently
seem to require financial intermediaries to function optimally
and those intermediaries create the very agency problems that
Bitcoin is designed to avoid.”
It is argued that Bitcoin does not entail faith in any public institution that
creates money; on the other hand, it seems to be recognized that financial
intermediaries are needed for its operation, which means going back to fiat
money .
It is worth mentioning here that in order to flourish as a currency , Bitcoin
and any other similar crypto require the same kind of financial mechanisms
used to deepen the market for other financial assets, which means enabling
price discovery and exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”). Also, while crypto
was activated as a movement to free people’ s financial business es from the
state, now the government is getting into the digital asset game with central
bank digital currency (“CBDC”).
It has to be taken into account that the Bitcoin network operates as a
public notary for all transactions conducted on the network, leaving a trace
of what has transpired in the virtual universe, in cyberspace.18 It is worth
mentioning here that cryptocurr encies are deemed to be volatile and lack
trustworthy information, making them dangerous investm ents.19 The
absence of regulatory certainty is a “massive barrier” to responsible
innovation in the crypto ecosystem.20 Furthermore, cryptocurrency is
described as digital money based on blockchain techno logy. It is
characteristic that Michael Conklin21 considers that “corporate inves tment
in cryptocurrencies and the acceptance of cryptocurrencies as payment
violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics…accepting
cryptocurrency for payment and holding cryptocurrency as an investment
clearly violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics.”
Payments and money transfers are the most obvious application of the
distributed public ledger technology . Bitcoin transaction costs are much
lower than those of traditional financial networks. The develop ment of the
“blockchain” is the innovativ e aspect of Bitcoin, which is a large
decentralized database that has distinctive identifiers for each user and each
Bitcoin. Moreover , virtual currencies and Bitcoin have the potential to
revolutionize the means by which payments are processed, but only if they
become ever-present.22 Could a broadly  used virtual currency pose a risk to
the stability of the financial system as a whole and to the economy more
generally? It could be said that a virtual currency can be transfo rmative if it
is widely adopted, and a widely adopted virtual currency can threaten the
financial system23 as long as it is uncontrollable.
It is worth mentioning that it is very difficult to get accurate and up-to-
date information about the number and volume of virtual currencies in
circulation. The majority of virtual currency schemes have insignificant
market capitaliz ations of below €1 million and only 21 exceed this figure;
only the top eight are above €10 million.24 Bitcoin25 is clearly the largest
and most well-established virtual currency , with a market capitalization of
more than $28 billion.26 On the other hand, Litecoin is scripted on an open-
source global payment network  that is never controlled centr ally by any
authority and uses a “scrypt” as proof of ledger , which can be decrypted
through a consumer -grade CPU. It could be said that Litecoin has a faster
block generation  rate compared to Bitcoin and thus presents a much faster
transaction validation. Ethereum was launched in 2015 and is a
decentralized software platform that permits Smart Contracts and
Distributed Applications to establish and run without any downtime,
control, impedim ent, fraud, control from any other third party . Zcash is a
more secure, open-source, decentralized digital cryptocurrency launched at
the end of 2016 , and it is regarded as more secure because all transactions
are recorded and registered on a blockchain with details about sending and
receiving parties, and the sum transferred remains secure by presenting a
provision for shielded transactio ns. There are also a number of post-Bitcoin
virtual currencie s that claim to be superior to Bitcoin, includin g Litecoin,
GeistGeld, SolidCoin, BBQcoin, and PPCoin,27 Dash (Darkcoin), Ripple
(XRP), and Monero (XMR). It is worth mentioning that command
regulation has a reputation for being inflexible, which means  suffocating
competition and inhibiting enterprise and growth. On the other hand,
flexibility is a problem with regulatory technology , but being  capable of
delivering more precise regulation. Even though precision is desired in
financial regulation as in any other field of law, it comes at the price of
flexibility . Computer scientists must solve this problem by developing
software that operates within flexible legal terms.
Under English law, cryptocurren cies are to be treated as property and so
the UKJT  accepted that cryptocurrencies have the characteristics of
property , including being definable, capable of being owned and
transferred, and having value.28 Hence, English courts recognizing crypto
assets as “property” means that they could be the subject of a proprietary
injunction.29 In B2C2 v Quoine,30 the court accept ed that Bitcoins could be
the subject of a trust, and so were property . Nonetheless, in New Zealand,
cryptocurrencies were regarded as “digital assets,” a form of property
capable of being held on trust.31 To that extent, A. Fowowe32 argues that
“While the US dollar has historically been the dominant
currency in international trade, alternative currencies like
cryptocurrencies and stablecoins are now more prevalent,
opening up new opportunities for individuals and
organisations to conduct cross-border transactions. However ,
using cryptocurrency also comes with legal dif ficulties, such
as the issue of jurisdiction, whether cryptocurrency can be
regarded as a property or being tangible under the Sale of
Goods Act.”
It is vital that recognizing the inner workings of monetary systems
generates valua ble insights into the function and stability of traditional
monetary systems33 and of the value of the alternatives offered by digital
networks such as Bitcoin34 and in general crypto-assets. Hence, monetary
exchange is more valuable at promoting cooperation than alternative
record-keeping systems. The important factor is not the type of money , but
rather the equality between units of money and the units of value in the
economy , which means that the value of money has to be equal  to the units
of value of the total worth of trade in an economy . If the exch ange rate is
not determined by the demand and supply of money and traded goods and
services, then instability produ ces problems in an economy . Price is the
variable reflecti ng the exchangeability of any item versus money. Money
has no role to play when individuals depend on shared knowledge of past
conduct to imitate patterns of monetary exchange.35 Bigoni et al.36 argue
that
“the dif ferences in long-run ef ficiency , strategies and
distribution of earnings in the Money and Memory treatments
demonstrate that money performs a richer set of functions than
just revealing past behaviors…the use of money imposes a
discipline on what agents are willing to do in order to keep the
economy on a cooperative track. Such findings suggest that
well-functioning monetary systems are not simply
rudimentary arrangements for monitoring past conduct in
society , but play a richer role than previously thought.”
The European economy rocketed  once it was freed from a restrained money
supply furthered  by the development of new markets, new technology , and
new payment systems that made possible long-distance commerce and
movements of capital possible. Governments produce money  themselves
much more efficiently in the age of paper currency and electronic benefit
transfers. Money is no longer tied to specie extraction.37
Finally , in the developed world, government fiscal activity is subject to
some degree of democratic accountability , and fiscal endeavor is a
manifestation of democratic politics.38 Governments are now much more
energetically involved in control over the private production of money .
Central banks now control the money supply by amending the price of
money through the setting of target interest rates. Money production has
become monetary policy , achieving the politically desired level s of growth,
employment, and inflation. Thus, market, governmental, and technological
changes signify that the effectiv eness of private money creation stemming
from fractional reserve banking is no longer so self-evident,  even if its
inherent instability is more and more obvious.
Banking law restricts entry into money augmentation.39 Morgan Ricks40
argues that
“private money often plays a central role in macroeconomic
disasters, at least those emanating from the financial sector .
The law of money encompasses the law of central banking…
the law of money must also address the interface between
public monetary institutions and private law .”
Banking regulat ion alters how capital is distributed both across sectors
within an economy and across jurisdictions, escalating competition among
governments that want to maximize national welfare.41
1.3 Regulating Virtual Currencies
Unlike the United States, the EU has employed a legal framework for the
regulation of electronic money . The Electronic Money Institutions Directive
2009/1 10/EC42 outlines electronic money as electronically and magnetically
stored monetary value and as epitomized by an entitlement on the issuer ,
which is issued on receipt of funds for the purpose of making payment
transactions which means that the transaction is an act, instigated by the
payer or by the payee, of placing, transferring, or withdraw ing funds,
regardless of any underlying obligations between the payer and the payee,
and it is underta ken by a natural or legal person other than the electronic
money issuer . Thus, it could be said that if a payment system accomplishes
these prerequisites, then it is regarded as electronic money , and only
electronic money institutions can issue electronic value. It must be
considered that the vision behind this inflexible regulation is apparent, as
what is taking place is the issuing of value into the economy . Therefore,
Bitcoin would meet the legal definition to a certain degre e, with the
exception that it is not mone y that is issued in the consensus that is
stipulated by the Directive. Due to the fact that there is no central issuing
authority , it would be difficult to imagine how financial services authorities
in char ge of regulating EMIs could intervene in Bitcoin.
The ECB has expressed its view that a virtual currency like Bitcoin is
“not money or currency from a legal perspective.”43 Swede n defines
currencies as being, inter alia, “tied to a central bank or a geogr aphic area.”
Bitcoin and other decentralized virtual currencies are designed  to dispense
with central bank and geographical localization, so they do not constitute
“currencies” in Sweden. Many countries in the Eurozone have stated that
virtual currencies do not constitute legal tender in their jurisdiction.44
Moreover , FinC EN stated that “‘virtual’  currency is a medium of exchange
that operates like a currency in some environments, but does not have all
the attributes of real currency . In particular , virtual currency does not have
legal tender status in any jurisdiction.”45
The SEC does not have direct oversight of transactions in currencies or
commodities, but the SEC is supervising the cryptocurre ncy-related
activities of the market participants it regulates, including broker -dealers,
investment advis ers, and trading platforms. Moreover , the SEC is allocating
a notew orthy portion of its resources to the ICO market. In addition, the
CFTC and SEC, along with other federal and state regulators and criminal
authorities, will persist to work together to bring transparency and integrity
to these markets, thereby discouraging and prosecuting fraud and abuse.46
The SEC has issued investor alerts warning of the risks of cryptocurrencies
and related products.47 Moreover , the SEC has also issued investor alerts
regarding the risks of original offerings of virtual currencies, and so, the
SEC established a “Cyber Unit” within its Enforcement Division to pursue
cyber -related misconduct, including violations of the securities laws
encompassing distributed ledge r or “blockchain” technology utilized by
Bitcoin and initial coin of ferings of virtual currencies.48
Bitcoin is tied to existing politic al economic structures and markets and
is theref ore implicated in the creation of wealth and power inequalities at
multiple scales due to the fact that Bitcoin and the governance of the system
are controlled by an elite class of capitalists, coders, and some
corporations.49 Further more, the SEC’ s rules for securities were found to
apply even though the securities were purchased with Bitcoin50 and as
mentioned the CFTC has defined digital currencies as commodities.51
Likewise, the usual regulations applicable to those involved in the trading
of comm odities apply in the digital currency situation as well.52 In
conjunction with the SEC, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(“FINRA”) released an investor alert concerning the risks of investing and
transacting in Bitcoin.53 The SEC publicly supported the IRS’s guidance of
treating Bitcoin  as property . Moreover , the SEC has become one of the
federal agencies involved in enforcement actions and has pursued several
Bitcoin compan ies for alleged fraudulent disclosures about business
revenue and assets,54 and for Ponzi schemes or fraud.55 Moreover , the SEC
ruled that the conduct perpetrated by the subject Bitcoin exchange
constituted an investment in “securities,” and therefore, the federal district
court has subjec t matter jurisdiction pursuant to Sections 20 and 22 of the
Securities Act of 1933 and Sections 21 and 27 of the Securitie s Exchange
Act of 1934.56 The SEC57 argued that the defendant’ s Bitcoin product was a
security for the reason that it constituted an “investment contrac t” under the
language of the Securities Act’s definition of “security ,” and an “investment
contract” was originally defined in SEC v. W.J. Howey Co, where the
Supreme Court said that an “investment contract” is “a contract, transaction
or scheme whereby a person [(1)] invests his money [(2)] in a common
enterprise and [(3)] is led to expect profits [(4)] solely from the efforts of
the prom oter or a third party .”58 Moreov er, the SEC has treated Bitcoin as a
security and applied antifraud and registration provisions of the securities
laws, particularly Sections 5(a), 5(c), and 17(a) of the Secur ities Act of
1933, Section 10(b) of the Secur ities Exchange Act of 1934, and Rule 10b-5
of the Exchange Act.59 While the SEC is only empowered with civil
enforcement and administrative actions, it works closely with offering
decisive informa tion to the Department of Justice60 to enga ge in criminal
enforcement of the federal securities laws. For the reason that the SEC
works closely with the CFTC, both agencies tackle options and futures in
Bitcoin where regulatory overlap and coordination already occurs.61 Lately
the SEC rejected an application by well-known investors to generate an
exchange-traded fund tied to the price of Bitcoin, in large part because the
markets where Bitcoin is prese ntly traded are mostly unregulated and the
SEC cited the lack of regulation as creating “concerns about the potential
for fraudulent or manipulative acts and practices in this market.”62
In other words, crypto assets are sometimes called virtual currency ,
coins, or tokens .63 If cryptos are securities under the test in SEC v. Howey
Co.,64 they are sold in line with the federal securities laws that currently
govern corporati ons, which means registration with the SEC and initial and
ongoing public filings.65
1.4 Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Policy
There is a monetary policy swapping between the pursuit of financial
stability and the pursuit of price and output stability , which means that
granting monetary policy anoth er purpose produces confusion  concerning
the central bank’ s commitment to price stability and, therefore , diminishes
the nominal anchor with potentially undesirable consequences for economic
outcomes. Safe assets play a central role in financial stability and monetary
policy because of their significance for collateral productio n and their
implications for macroeconomic stability .
Is there a relation between monetary policy and financial stability
policy? Monetary policy and financial stability policy are associated with
each other and consequently , there is no dichotomy between monetary and
financial stability policy . Monetary policy influences financial stability , at
the same time “macro prudential” policies upholding financial stability have
an effect on monetary policy . Thus, if it is suggested that “macroprudential”
policies are controlling credit bubbles by slowing credit growth and,
therefore, slowing the growth of aggregate demand, then monetary policy
needs to be easier in order to counterbalance weaker aggrega te demand.
Zekos considers that “macrop rudential” policies are contro lling credit
bubbles by allowing rightful and not inflated credit growth, thus permitting
the growth of aggregate demand on a real basis and values of the economy
and not inflated ones.
Monetary policy and policies toward financial stability are two sides of
the same coin.66 The typical approach in mone tary economics underlines
the substance of managing market prospects, and this prospect conduit of
monetary policy  turns into the prevailing matter in many central banks,
particularly among those that follow inflation targeting.67 Milton Friedman
and Anna J. Schwartz68 argue that “leaving monetary and banking
arrangements to the market would have produced a more satisfactory
outcome than was actually achieved through governmental involvement.”
Instead, if policy rates are kept low to accelerate the economy , there is a
greater risk that a credit bubb le might occur , requiring tighter “macro
prudential” policies to make certain that a credit bubble does not get on
track. Therefore, the synchronization of monetary and “macro prudential”
policies is essential in order for the three objectives of price stability, output
stability , financial stability to be achieved. Frederic S. Mishkin69 argues that
“financial sector plays a very prominent role in the macro
economy and makes it highly nonlinear at times. This requires
that we abandon the linear -quadratic framework for thinking
about how to conduct monetary policy when there is a
financial disruption. There is now a stronger case for a risk
management framework that factors in tail risks that can
produce very adverse outcomes for the economy…there is a
stronger case for monetary policy to lean against credit
bubbles (but not asset-price bubbles per se), rather than just
cleaning up after the bubble has burst. Using monetary policy
to pursue financial stability goals is not an easy task, however ,
and research on how to monitor credit conditions so that it
decisions to use monetary policy to restrict excessive risk are
based on the correct information will be a high priority for
research in the future. Finally , the financial crisis has made it
clear that the interactions between the financial sector and the
aggregate economy imply that monetary policy and financial
stability policy are closely intertwined.”
Financial innovation and the new means to transfer credit risk lessen the
informational substance of standard bank balance-sheet indic ators. Bank
risk surroundings need to be considered in conjunction with other indicators
such as size, liquidity , and capitalization conventionally used to consider a
bank’ s capacity and readiness to supply new loans. Banks illustrated by
lower projected default rates are able to put forward a larger amount of
credit and to better protect their loan supply from monetary policy
alterations.70
The euro area banks play a key role as one of the central conduits for the
execution of monetary policy , having a fundamental stance in the financial
system. The function of banks in the execution mechanism is altered,
primarily for the reason that the business of banks has under gone essential
modifications in recent years, as a result of financial innovation, financial
integration, and an upsur ge in market funding.71
Ingredients of the banking area have moved away from the conventional
“originate and hold” to an “originate and distribute” pattern of the banking
company , which is much more dependent on market forces having an
influence on the manner they award credit and respond to monetary policy
desires. Borio and Zhu72 say that financial innovation, in correlation with
alterations to the capital regulatory framework (Basel II), enhanced the
effect of the perception, pricing, and management of risk on the methods of
banks. Also, Rajan73 says that more  market-based pricing and stronger
dealings between banks and financial markets aggravate the motivation
structures driving banks, leading to stronger relations between monetary
policy and financial stability consequences. Likewise, W. Breuer and A.
Knetsch74 argue that
“Yet another breakthrough in digital finance is the emer gence
of decentralized finance, mainly characterized by
cryptocurrencies and security tokens. The overall market
capitalization for cryptocurrencies is around 1.19 trillion USD
as of July 2023. These currencies act as an alternative to the
conventional fiat currencies where consumers can utilize them
for payments without the role of intermediaries, hence serving
as a medium of exchange.”
It is worth mentioning here that due to the fact that the central bank is
decisive in shaping monetary policy ,75 the increasing acceptance and use of
cryptocurrencies are key development in the global financial landscape. The
central bank ascertains the discount rates, which are the interest rates at
which commercial banks borrow money from the central bank, thus shaping
the interest rates charged by commercial banks to their customers and
shaping the cost of borrowing for individuals and businesses. Consequently ,
employing cryptocurrencies will abolish the demand for financial and
foreign exchange middlemen, reallocating currency supply away from
central banks. Thus, this existing monetary structure was formed to affect
inflation, economic growth, and financial stability by controlling the
amount of money in circulation, which means that the uncontrolled
production of means considered to be money in circulation will inflate the
global financial  system in due course according to the will of the elite
controlling the whole cyberspace system and, consequently , the global
economy owing to the advancement of the AI economy .
1.5 New Technologies and Dollar
Is there a need for the establishment of a new international monetary system
encompassing electronic money ? Have cryptocurrencies and crypto assets
been influenced by conventional monetary policies? Will the dominance of
the dollar be demolished due to the political failures of the United States in
the global arena? The US hegem ony over the international system has given
its curre ncy dominance over the global monetary system. Due to AI
technology and the new political and economic reality of the global balance
of power , a new global political and economic order has caused the global
system’ s transformation. It has to be taken into account that the dollar ’s
influence caused a financial crisis that affected European currencies via a
decline in the value of their currencies expressed by a sharp increase in
inflation rates and a fall in the competitiveness of their products. Moreover ,
the global system is experienc ing a rapid end to the system of unequal
exchange between Western countries and the rest of the world, along with
an upsu rge in the number of regional crises influencing the dollar ’s
circulation. The China Securities and Regulatory Commission revealed that
petroleum oil futures contracts commencing trading on March 26, 2022,
will be denominated in Chinese Yuan rather than US dollars.  Hence, de-
dollarization is the process of dropping the use of the US dollar in
international transactions and shifting to other currencies or payment
systems.76 Subsequently , the fluctuations in the dollar ’s value had effects on
the global economy , and so the dollar exchange rate advances the
competitiveness of foreign economies, principally US corporations, causing
higher growth rates in these countries, entailing substitution effects and
income effects. Moreover , there is a substitution or transfer consequence
when fluctuations in the exchange rate influence the profit of a foreign
sector in the international marke t at the expense of sectors in the dollar area.
On the other hand, because of the transformation of the global economy and
the rise of noteworthy global powers such as China,77 the global economy
is experi encing sub-regional trade, investment, and financial reform. To that
extent, Osama Wagdi et al.78 argue that
“The global oil market is ready to abandon the petrodollar; the
weight of giving up the petrodollar will be more than 50% of
the oil market; it will most likely take three to five years.
Russia and China are attempting to undermine U.S. control
over the global monetary system for political reasons.”
Currently , US hegemony over the global monetary system means that the
dollar will main tain extensive global dominance, which will be destabilized
by the entrance of unrestrained cryptocurrencies and crypto assets in the
global market, which will be handled by AAI systems that seem not to be
controlled by the current elite unless the forthcoming AAI systems run by
AAI humanoids are controlled behind the curtains by an AAI elite.
It could be said that China’ s digital yuan sets a noteworthy challenge to
the current dollar -dominated monetary order because the digital yuan serves
not only China’ s external objec tive of international digitalization but also
another pole of countries opposing the dollar ’s domination.79 In other
words, China’ s digital yuan serves both its international objective of a
greater role for the yuan in its mission to confront the dolla r-dominated
order and its national objective of greater state control over private money .
Hence, it could be said that the digital yuan is not only a medium of
exchange but also digital yuan as a digital currency confronts any private
cryptocurrencies trespassing into the traditional domain of sovereigns. To
that extent, Lan Cao80 argues that “yuan internationalization and
digitalization should be understood and considered within a wider context,
possibly signaling the beginning of the end of dollar hegemony .”
1.6 Metaverse in Finance
AI and robotics technologies are amalgamated in several economic sectors
such as financial trading and analysis. Algorithmic trading, driven by ΑAI
algorithms has transformed market dynamics by permitting  automated
execution of trades. Hence, the integration of AI and finance has reformed
the financial landscape, and by utilizing AAI, the speed, security , and
efficiency of financial markets are improved. In line with this, blockchain
technology , augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR) have allowed
the materialization of the metaverse81 being a virtual space where people
interact comparably to the real world. To that extent, the metaverse is linked
to the crypto-metaverse as a result of the strong integration of blockchain
technology and cryptocurrenci es into virtual environments.82 In other
words, the metaverse is a principal environment for the conception, trading,
and ownership of digital assets and cryptocurrencies, generating the
metaverse spher e for the global financial market. Thus, digital art, virtual
real estate, and gaming tokens are acquired, sold, and traded within a digital
terrain with the assistance of metaverse cryptocurrency coins and tokens. In
Italy, tokens have been conside red as “digital assets” under the provisions
of Article 810 of the Italian Civil Code83 and in France84 tokens are
regarded as “incorporeal assets.”
DeFi platforms are looking for opportunities within the metaverse, which
means that users are involved in DeFi services like borrowing, lending, and
gaining profit without leaving the virtual world. Blockchain technology and
cryptocurrencies not only advan ce accessibility but also launch new ways
for earning and employing cryptocurrencies. Thus, the metaver se alters the
complexion of financial services  which means that virtual banks, insurance
companies, and investment platforms materialize within this digital world,
presenting users with an alternative to conventional financial institutions.
To that extent, smart contracts automate financial agreements, diminishing
the requirement for intermediaries and intensifying the effectiveness of
transactions. Thus, incorporating the metaverse into finance boosts global
financial system accessibility by eliminating traditional barrie rs, inspiring
innovation in financial services that lead to new products and solutions, and
stimulating financial inclusion.85
Fintech is transforming finance and contesting current regulations linked
to financial inclusion. Moreover , virtual banking is distinguished from
electronic bank ing owing to its absence of any reliance on physical
infrastructure.86 While virtual banks run exclusively online, traditional
banks can offer more banking options in advancing market choice and, by
this means stimulating financial inclusion without inevitably being digital.
Hence, virtual banks, fintech start-ups, and online-based payment firms
enter the supply side, advancing market selection and so, amplifying
financial inclusion. Also, virtual banks boost financial inclusion by
providing easier  and faster bank account opening, easier modes to deliver
identity for compliance with KYC requirements,87 and algorithmically
driven decision- making for loan approval. On the other hand, traditional
banks and virtual banks are subject to the same regulatory supervisory
standards.88
Interoperability among digital platforms89 is a key attribute of the
metaverse90 and so the metaverse represents  a prospective “parallel judicial
universe, an independent meta-system with its own virtual jurisdiction.”91
It has to be taken into account that when a publicly traded company is
attacked, the damage extends beyond the organization, causing financial
losses to shareholders. To that extent, the appearance of the metaverse
increases the attack surface for malicious players by generating  more entry
points for malwa re and data breaches. In line with this, by selling encrypted
data back to its original owners,  offenders obtain profits from personal data
that had little value on the black market. Thus, digitizati on and the
explosive growth of online business have caused cyberattacks, and
corporations have become attractive targets. For the reason that
corporations have centralized their data into information networks to
augment competence, consumer data are more easily tar geted in an attack.92
1.7 AI, Decentralized Finance (DeFi), and NFTs
AI’s capability to produce distinctive content through algorithm s displays a
novel approach  to NFT formation, where digital artworks are created
autonomously or in collaborati on with human artists. AI is not only an
instrument for producing NFTs but also for managing them, which means
that advanced algorithms investigate market trends, user preferences, and
other data to propose NFTs to prospective buyers, thus augmenting the
discovery process in marketplaces. Hence, AI competencies are seen as an
instrumental asset for both creators seeking visibility and collectors looking
for their next acquisition. In other words, AI’s function in NFTs allows
confirming the authenticity and originality of digital assets, which means
that AI aids in identifying prosp ective copyright infringements or duplicates
and so warrant ing the integrity of the marketplace. Nonetheless, the
employment of AI in the NFT space causes concerns regarding  authorship
and copyright, particularly when AI-generated artworks becom e tokenized
as NFTs. Thus, while AI technology progresses, its impulsion on the NFT
ecosystem is increasing and restructuring the terrain of digital creativity and
ownership.93
It is characteristic that the success of new product development efforts is
based on the creativity of the underlying ideas, which means that creativity
encompasses the production of new ideas that are both original and
valuable. Theref ore, innovation comes as an implementation of ideas into
new products and processes. Consequently , creativity is regarded as the first
stage of the innovation process, followed by implementation. What is the
role of AI in creativity? AI will be utilized in generating new innovations
instead of humans due to its capacity , and so, AI creations have to be
awarded the relative IPRs.
It has to be taken into accou nt that the synthesis of Decentralized
Finance (DeFi) and NFTs94 denotes  a considerable evolution in the digital
economy , and so, this conver gence presents innovative financial products
and services, escalating the utility of NFTs in finance. DeFi platforms
employ blockchain technology to generate financial systems that run
without central authorities, such as banks or governments, presenting
services like lending, borrowing , and investing directly on the blockchain.
To that extent, NFTs are becoming fundamental to DeFi by representing
distinctive asset s utilized as collateral for loans or as part of investment
strategies. In other words, an NFT art piece employed as collateral to secure
a loan on a DeFi platform opens up new liquidity prospects for NFT
holders, permitt ing them to leverage their digital assets without selling
them. Hence, DeFi projects tokenize real-world assets as NFTs, making
them tradable and functional within the DeFi ecosystem, and so, tokenizing
property titles, luxury goods, or unique experiences, which means that
NFTs expand involvement in DeFi, advancing more diverse investment
opportunities. Nonetheless, amalgamating NFTs with DeFi brings forward
complexities, such as evaluating the value of irreplaceable digital assets for
collateral reason s and handling the risks linked with their volat ility. Hence,
the decentralized character of these platforms presents extra challenges in
safeguarding security and averting fraud, and so, demanding constant
innovation in design and platform governance. In line, Chen Jun and Danny
Friedmann95 argue that
“NFT  platforms explicitly point out that if one buys a “digital
collectible,” one will get the NFT  in combination with
copyright of the underlying work. Its monetization process is
linked to fiat money (namely the Renminbi), but the
tradability of NFT s is limited to trade within separate
platforms/chains.”
1.8 NFTs and Digital Economy
As ment ioned earlier , the advent of NFTs is affecting the digital economy
by presenting novel notions of ownership, value, and exchang e in digital
spaces. To that extent, NFTs confront conventional economic  models by
allowing digital assets to be uniquely owned and traded, much like physical
assets and, thus, obscuring the lines between the tangible and intangible in
economic terms due to the fact that NFTs redefine ownership. It could be
said that blockchain-based proof of ownership for digital items  means that
NFTs form scarcity and exceptionality where duplication was once
inexhaustible. Hence, scarcity is becoming a central economic principle that
NFTs apply to digital content, possibly escalating its value and making it a
tradable commodity within the digital economy . Likewise, NFTs are
accelerating the formation of new markets and opportunities for
monetization, which means that artists, musicians, and creators can sell
directly their digital works to a global audience, sidestepping established
intermediaries and, thus, keeping a larger share of the profits. Thus, the AI
economy not only energizes creators but also accelerates a more active and
diverse marketplace for digital goods. In line with this, Joerg Osterrieder96
et al. ar gue that
“the implications of NFT s for the digital economy are
profound. They are catalyzing a shift towards a more
decentralized and creator -centric marketplace, where digital
assets are recognized and valued in new ways…t’ s clear that
they are not just a passing trend but a significant evolution in
the digital economy , with the potential to reshape how we
create, share, and value digital content.”
It is worth noting that given that cryptocurrencies are the default money for
NFT transactions, their price patterns expose this interconnection. Hence,
NFTs are excha nged in cryptocurrency exchanges but largely perform as
digital assets, holding value, empowering transactions, and operating as
units of account. To that extent, exploiting NFTs to ascertain digital
ownership is innovative and safe, thus inserting security into ownership
claims and enhancing trustworthiness. Also, prior to NFTs’ appearance,
there were no decentralized ways to quickly and definitively authenticate
digital artwork ownership. It is argued that NFTs, predom inantly in
decentralized finance (DeFi) sectors, steer more as a result of investors
embracing a collective mindset and following investment trends, resulting
in a shortage of rational asset analysis, which means that NFTs are
considered to be a different asset class from other cryptoc urrencies.97
Moreover , NFT price dynamics were tied to Bitcoin market movements and
trends in its early phases. Suliman Alshahmy98 et al. argue that “In today’ s
financial lands cape, emer ging digital assets’  independ ence from
conventional financial instruments is important. This theory holds that
cryptocurrency prices drive the NFT market.” It seems that NFT and
cryptocurrency markets have acquired attention for their value  due to the
explicit causes of price variati ons and their consequences. Also, Bitcoin
market efficiency and returns are time-varying, and so, Bitcoin investor
attention concentrates on its links with returns, trading volume, volatility ,
and liquidity . Weiwei Guo99 et al. find that “factors such as changing user
composition and increased regulatory scrutiny alter the dynamics of on-
chain factors and their influence on market ef ficiency .”
It is characteris tic that buyers are expected to exploit the NFT as
collateral to fund their purchase , rather than taking a traditiona l mortgage.
R. Wilson Freyermuth100et al. ar gue that
“the NFT  financing model is not a mere technological
upgrade, but rather transports parties out of the domain of
traditional mortgages and into secured transactions law , with
significant legal and policy implications. Most worryingly , it
exposes borrowers to swift and irreversible home liquidations
in cases of default, robbing them of the protections historically
afforded to homeowners.”
Hence, these dealings are still real property acquisitions financed with a
loan.
Finance has become one of the most globalized and digitized sectors of
the economy . Moreover , globalization, digitization, and money are boosting
AI in finance forward at an ever-increasing pace. In line, Zetzsche101 et al.
argue that
“the use of AI in finance comes with three regulatory
challenges: (1) AI increases information asymmetries
regarding the capabilities and ef fects of algorithms between
users, developers, regulators and consumers; (2) AI enhances
data dependencies as dif ferent day’ s data sources may alter
operations, ef fects and impact; and (3) AI enhances
interdependency , in that systems can interact with unexpected
consequences, enhancing or diminishing ef fectiveness, impact
and explainability . These issues are often summarized as the
“black box” problem: no one understands how some AI
operates or why it has done what it has done, rendering
accountability impossible.”
It must be taken into account that the expanding uses of black box AI102 by
governments and private corporations can have negative outcomes for
people due to malfunctioning algorithms and so, affecting  an entire
economy , which means that it is imminent the development of AAI tools for
controlling and correcting AI predictions and AI decis ion-making
automatically . Brandon L. Garrett and Cynthia Rudin103 argue that
“Regulations and statutes regar ding the deployment of AI in criminal law
settings should directly require interpretable and validated AI.”
It could be said that bolstering cyberspace governance of regulated
financial market participants through external regulation is the way forward
in Al era. In other words, the most effective course forward  implicates
regulatory approaches which bring the human into the loop, augmenting
internal governance through external regulation. Thus, the application of the
principles of governance in an Al environment is an answer .
In the context of finance, the post-crisis concentration on personal and
managerial responsibility systems offers a central external framework to
augment internal accountability in the context of AI, which means that AI-
tailored manager responsibility frameworks, augmented in some cases by
independent AI review committees, as developments to the conventional
three lines of defense, are the most effective way of dealing with AI-related
matters not only in finance concerning “black box” problems but also
possibly in any regulated business.
In the end, the use of AI for managerial tasks implies that AI
technologies are a new set of agents in corporations. Moreover , AI systems
have practically unlimited information-processing capability and present
perfectly consistent behavior . However , they can introduce statistical biases
due to unsuitable data; thus, AI and shortly AAI systems have to be utilized
in order to correct any biased data instantly . In other words, current AI can
be pre-programm ed to engage in clear mathematically defined goals while
taking into consideration legal and ethical constraints . On the other hand,
AAI systems can objectively run and directly correct any algorithm by
instantly choosing to insert of the newest unbiased data. Additionally , AI
technology is projected to deliver welfare and security , which makes it a
strategic resource for governments, meaning that AI should not be an elitist
project handled by political-administrative and corporate interests.
1.9 Financing Startups
It has to be taken into account that financing new ventures is risky and
characterized by asymmetric information and multiple incentive problems.
In other words, most startups are not attractive borrowers. Venture capital
backing substitutes for positive free cash flows in the context of startups
and that intellectual property performs a central role function in substituting
tangible assets as collateral, making venture debt attractive to lenders.
Moreover , early-stage venture capitalists choose venture debt if their
portfolio corpor ations have low upside prospective and if they cannot gain
from the value that a late-stage venture capitalist adds or if uncertainty is
low. Consequently , a venture loan is comprised of two key elements: a loan
and warrants.
Startups typicall y have no positi ve cash flow, little collateral to offer, and
high bankruptcy rates, making them poor loan candidates. Nevertheless,
venture loans, as a hybrid form financing, embrace both a loan and a
warrant and are used in practice.
In other words, innovative startups have limited access to debt, not
having positive cash flows (yet) , have inadequate collateral assets, and are
portrayed by uncertainty concerning the success of their business model and
high bankruptcy rates. Also, venture loans are regarded as “hybrid form” of
financing betwe en straight debt and convertible bonds, which means that
venture loans are frequently linked with the maturity of the startup,
performance-oriented investor types, and startups with financ ially strong
committed investors. To that extent, new ventures are subject to the
liabilities of newness and smallness, meaning their bankruptcy rates are
higher and their access to resources is limited compared to those of
established corporations. In line with this, Nico Lehnertz et al.104 argue that
“venture loans are associated with strongly committed existing
investors, which stimulates the requirements of venture
lenders and is signaled through lar ge invested capital amounts
per investor in previous rounds. Furthermore, we find that
venture loans are associated with rather mature startups and
offer empirical indication that the medical, health, and life
science industry with clear milestones provides good
conditions for venture loans.”
The warrant permits the venture lender to participate in the return of
successful exits and so, in contrast to straight debt, a venture loan offers
upside potential. Nonetheless, a venture loan has to be distinguished from
convertible notes that are often offered by existing or future equity
investors. To that extent, the intellectual property of new ventures is
advocated as a substitute for missing tangible assets as prospective loan
collateral, and so, patents are imperative tangible assets offered as collateral
for venture debt.105 Thus, startups offering appropriate intellectual property
as colla teral and as quality certification are appropriate candidates for
venture loans.106 Moreover , with increasing maturity , startups gather
tangible assets and become more profitable, leading to an increase in debt
use.107
The financial growth cycle of startups usually starts with one’s own
capital injection s and support from family and friends, followed by
participation from business investors. Thus, startups in intermed iate or later
stages of the lifecycle attract venture capital investors.
1.10 Finance Models
Increasing digitization and automation of processes in all parts of society
have initiated a deliberation on whether people want to count on algorithms.
Simultaneously , algorithms present openings for new busin ess models
relying less on human decision-making and human interaction, but more on
pre-defined rules and processes. The financial industry offers many
applications for algorithms in trading, asset management, and financial
advice. Robo-advisors grounded in algorithms are utilized to help human
fund managers or investment advisors. M. Germann and C. Merkle108 argue
that
“Participants acting as investors can tie their incentives to
either a human fund manager or an investment algorithm. We
find no sign of algorithm aversion: participants care about
returns, but do not have strong preferences which financial
intermediary obtains these returns. Contrary to what has been
suggested, participants are neither quicker to lose confidence
in the algorithm after seeing it err . However , we find that
participants’  inability to separate skill and luck when
evaluating intermediaries slows down their migration to the
algorithm.”
As a result of economies of scale, algorithms present low-cost products and
advice to retail clients serving many people at a time, while fees for human
financial advice are often prohibitive for small investments. Financial
algorithms now directly interact with retail investors, and new fintech
corporations relying on technology enter the market for investments all over
the world.109
Financial techn ology is improving financial processes and activities
predominantly through the use of computers and smartphones. Robo-
advisory platforms use algorithms to present financial planning services
without human supervision, thereby delivering asset manageme nt solutions
that are both more transparent and less expensive.110 It could be said that
the decentralization of finance has advanced the development of innovative
financing formulas based on which corporations, entrepreneurs, or project
developers raise funds in open calls through cyberspace, receiving
cryptocurrencies in exchange for digital assets entitling buyers to an
exclusive right, reward, or financial claim.111 Yan Chen et al.112 argue that
“decentralization has an inverted U-shaped relationship with
platforms’  market capitalization, developer attention, and
development activity . We further examine factors driving the
decentralization of platform governance and find that digital
platforms of the infrastructure layer—relative to those of the
application layer—have a tendency to become more
decentralized. This tendency , nevertheless, can be of fset by
experienced leaders to achieve semi-decentralization.”
Tokens representing ownership of an asset, such as corpora te debt and
equity , are called security tokens, and their purchase through an STO is
considered an investment subject to securities laws.113 Contrasted with
traditional finan cial products, the issuance of blockchain-ba sed tokens
through ICOs/IEOs/ST Os presents enhanced public tradability ,
transparency , low entry barrier s, competence, automation, and high-cost
efficacy being both alternatives and complements to other innovative
sources of financing, such as crowdfunding and VC.114
Taking into account that Block chain115 platforms are written in code,
empowering data ownership and decision-making processes, blockchain
facilitates groups of stakeholders to collectively produce and distribute
value among themselves in new and more decentralized modes.
Business financing optimizes the mix of loans, bonds, common stock,
and many other feasible facilities. Moreover , the ampleness of a particular
mode of financing a business diver ges depending on the precise  situation of
the corporation and the econom y. New corporations are not able to acquire
loans or issue debt.116 Moreover , information asymme tries over and above
interest payments inadequate to compensate financiers for the fairly high
possibility of losses are among the reasons which means that new
corporations have to count on equity financing, encompassing the
additional advantage of investors who support the management with their
own experience and networks.
It is characterist ic that in a centralized token economy ,117 central players
allow interoperability with other central players so that tokens are
transferred between them across digital platforms via SWIFT . Moreover ,
technologically , asset ownership management counts on digita l platforms
controlled by central players and, therefore, controlling a platform has
power over the stored data since the processes executed via the platform
cannot be authenticated by other players. Also, the main players gather
decision rights for the governance of provided digital platforms,
dependencies on the central actors are augmented, and all individual players
have to trust the central players. Likewise, players have to trust that the
central player will not stop offering services on a digital platform or
increase service fees.
On the other hand, a decentralized token economy tackles drawbacks
linked with the involvement of central players in asset ownership
management by cutting depend encies on central players and their digital
platforms. Hence, various players cooperatively run a digital platform,
dividing the linked duties, such as for platform upholding.118
The decentralize d token economy empowers direct transactions  between
players without mediation by banks, which means improving cost
competence and via tokens boost suppleness in managing asset ownership
which means that multiple players can contribute to decision-making for the
central missions in asset ownership management that are presently executed
by centr al players. Correspondingly , DLT permits the automa tion of key
assignments of the central playe rs entangled in centralized token economy .
Therefore, cross-ledger intero perability (CLI) advances the technical
capabilities to connect isolated DLT systems prevailing over shortcomings,
such as limited network consequences and suppleness in business relations,
which means that technical standards empower digital support of
governance mechanisms.
The goal of centralized exchanges (CEXes) is to offer a method to trade
and custody currencies and cryptocurrencies. A decentralized exchange
(DEX) offers a method to trade  cryptocurrencies in a peer-to-peer manner
using smart contracts, thereby reducing default or scam risks and adding
privacy delivering full transparency . Nevertheless, a DEX presents the
likelihood to trade most crypt ocurrencies at any time via a system of
automated market.119
Tokenization120 permits trading via a distribu ted ledger , a variety of
ownership and access claims, licenses, and royalty rights as an alternative to
conventional, paper -based exchange. Also, tokenized claims concern both
physical and digital assets, which means that tokenization offers investors a
new mode to obtain “fractional ownership”121 and so, investors can swap
tokenized claim s for physical assets such as real estate, artwo rks, etc. In
other words, “tokenization” concerns the holding and transfer of financial
assets on decentralized blockch ains or distributed ledgers.122 In line, Rosa
M. Garcia-T eruel and Héctor Simón-Moreno123 argue that “private law
rules may be adapted to the tokenization of property rights, which may
contribute to the establishment of a digital market for the trading of asset-
backed tokens worldwide.”
Concerning tokenization, Darian M. Ibrahim124 argues that
“crypto issuers would be required to include a short,
prominent “warning box” on their websites that includes only
unexpected and harmful features of the crypto. Coupled with
the whitepapers already provided by crypto developers—a
shining example of voluntary disclosure working—the
warning-box add-on completes the crypto regulation picture
and properly balances innovation and investor protection.”
It has to be taken into account that legislation is illustrated as too weak and
slow to protect individuals in a rapidly developing technologica l world due
to the fact that changes in the technological setting are so quick and
profound that regulations become quickly ineffectual at appropriately
protect individuals.125
Crowdfunding is the process of raising capital for a campaign, a project,
or a new business through the rather small contributions of a fairly large
group of individuals over a set period of time, permitting all sorts of
promoters to find financing for all kinds of projects.126 The crowdfundi ng is
made possible by technology through online platforms offering its
contributors new communication means and a model simplifying the
capital-raising process.127 Also, crowdfunding establishes a market
connecting directly the funde rs with the promoters of projects, thus
eliminating the requirement for intermediaries such as banks or venture
capitalists. Of course, the online platform is required for obtaining funds
comparatively simply , efficiently and quickly .128 Crowdlending is known as
peer-to-peer lending (P2P) or peer-to-business lending (P2B), and capital is
obtained directly  from the origi nal source of funds rather than from a third
party . It is characteristic that while P2Bs’  capability to directly connect
investors and corporate borrowers relieves them from the requirement to
hold costly regulatory capital, it subjects them to the impact of liquidity
shocks. On the other hand, bank s’ liquid inventories permit them to bridge
funding gaps, but at the cost of subjecting them to credit risks and the
resulting regulatory oversight, involving capital requirement s. In other
words, the variety in designs used in the P2B industry , along with the
alterations that have taken place  in Funding Circle, reveals that the financial
industry is still in a stage of experimentation.
Crowdlending is a part of the FinTech “revolution” disintermediating
financial service s. It has to be taken into consideration that the P2P/P2B
online lending  platforms have challenged traditional banks and
intermediaries by presenting more cost-ef ficient offerings as a result of the
scaling of the newly adopted technologies, and so, these services tender
higher returns for lenders and lower interest rate costs for borrowers.129 It
could be said that P2P platforms are closely bank substitutes serving the
same borrowers.130 Also, the platforms do not take credit risks but rather
decentralize these by spreading them to the crowdlenders. It could be said
that peer-to-peer (P2P) lending substitutes bank loans, having negative
influence on national bank loan balances when P2P lending balances is
big.131
In other words, crowdfunding implicates the financing of projects by
large numbers of people via digital platforms serving as electronic
marketplaces, which means that peer-to-peer (P2P) lending is one of the
two main methods of for-profit  crowdfunding. The other method is equity
crowdfunding, where early-stage ventures raise outside equity from the
crowd via digital platforms. Additionally , P2P lending involves the crowd
and financial institutions funding loans to small businesses or to
consumers.132
It has to be taken into account that market participants have articulated
fear regarding the cost and complexity of relying on Regulation
Crowdfunding encompassing disclosure regulations.133 Crowdfunding
presents an equivalent situation  to ICOs in that it also implicates selling
risky investments to unaccredi ted investors through general solicitation.
ICOs present high levels of information asymmetry between developers and
coin buyers, both in terms of a coin’ s newness and its inspiring blockchain
technology . Nonetheless, crowdfunding disclosures have been inefficient
and unread by most investors.134 Thus, disclosures reduce information
asymmetry ex ante and permit fraud enforcement ex post.135
P2P marketplaces provide two novel sources of external debt finance; on
one hand, P2P business loans offer medium-term finance for maturities of
up to five years,  and on the other , invoice finance presents short-term asset-
backed loans with up to one-ye ar maturity . Moreover , P2P or marketplace
lending diver ges from bank lending since it is funded via a cyberspace
portal and is not being subject to Basel III and other form al banking
regulations, constituting a unique method of outside entrepreneurial
finance.136 In line with this, Jerry Coakley and Winifred Huang137 argue
that
“the success of the P2P  business lending market stems from
the symbiotic relationship between financial institutions and
small investors as the lenders. The former exploits the
collective wisdom of the crowd while the latter views lar ge
institutional investments as a certification ef fect that reduces
information asymmetries and sometimes herds in their wake.”
It has to be taken into account that the fintech platforms have advanced the
lending process by rendering the P2P lending and microloans that adjust to
the borrower ’s wishes. Moreove r, different P2P lending platforms utilize the
latest technology in credit risk assessment and lending suitability , allowing
them to present fitting solutions.138
Online lending platforms by directly connecting retail lenders with
corporate or consumer borrowers have been believed to be a new model of
credit finance: decentralized, transparent, disintermediated, and more
information-ef ficient. On the other hand, Julian Franks et al.139 argue that
“the main proble m of the platfo rm was its vulnerability to liquidity shocks,
resulting in sizable deviations from information efficiency . These increased
over time due to a growing role played by non-crowd players, particularly
large investors and algorithms.”
Has the right to print conventional money been utilized for conquering
the globe by an elite? Will cryptocurrencies and tokenization be the new
tools for expanding old elite colonization of the globe? Is the supposed
decentralized crypto a veil in order to eventually control the printing and
circulation of money according to the interests of the same old elite? Taking
into account that any digital money facilitates fast, seamless, and around-
the-clock trans actions betwe en consumers and corpora tions, the
tokenization of the financial system will implicate a complementary
relationship between digital public money , like CBDCs, and other forms of
digital private money . CBDC is a device for central banks to maintain
stability within the digital realm, essentially tackling the limitations of
traditional forms of money .140
It seems that tokenization is transforming how money better serves
financial deman ds and, as a result, it generates new openings for consumers
and corporations to transact in new spaces and new methods which means
opening new paths for wider inter-industry settlements, assisting financial
inclusion, empo wering seamle ss cross-border transactions, and finally
boosting the competence of capital markets.
It is characteristic that DeFi has made it possible to cut transacti on costs,
promote wider  financial inclusion, enable open access, increase
transparency , tolerate borderless finance, and generati ng new opportunities
for entrepreneurs and innovators. Consequently , DeFi has advanced finance
via a financial system without borders, jurisdiction, and centralized control,
while raising significant challenges and threats to financial stability .141
Decentralized finance, or DeFi, replicates financial services with smart
contracts over blockchains, and so DeFi operates as money “Legos”142
which means that cryptocurrencies are a tradable financial product
representing a digital asset acting as a digital form of money .
1.11 Data and Finance
Advances in AI systems generat e a variety of smart connected products and
services, softwa re, data analytics, and connectivity .143 Big data allows for
information handling, and so, predictive analytics tools that control data
volume, velocity , and variety are utilized. Additionally , the explosion of
digital data is critical, as by using big data, managers can measu re and grasp
more insight into their corporation and directly translate that knowledge
into enhanced decision-making and performance.144
AI has the abilit y to accurately interpret external data, to learn from such
data, and to use those learning s to accomplish particular objectives and
tasks through flexible adjustm ents. Additionally , AI conc entrates on
financial detection and intrusion detection systems in data networks through
data mining techniques and neural networks.
Does AI monetize data? It has to be taken into considera tion that
monetizing colle cted data is a revenue source for large corporati ons, such as
Facebook and Google. Huge data footprints are aggregated and ultimately
exploited to cross-sell and upsell products to customers which means that
data is valuable. The scale of automation has enriched the industrial
corporations with more intelli gent and self-adaptive improv ements are
made through AI. AI software is creating unnoticed business prospects and
societal values, with even smarter chat bots offering expert assistance and
robot advisors conducting direct research in many fields.
It is argued that learning algori thms and big data, in combina tion with
human creativity , assist organizations in optimizing their business and better
predicting and controlling their processes and applications.145 Hence,
corporate information is collected, shared, and enriched via co-creative
computational systems and assistive technologies that augment human
capabilities and productivity . Are AAI human oids the
intermediator/intermediary betw een humans and machines? At the moment,
AI systems are used by humans in order to advance any busin ess process,
but AAI humanoids will be able to control the entire economic process
without any human involvemen t. It is supposed that AAI humanoids will
not be the new deadly weapon in the hands of the old elite in order to
govern the globe once again.
It has to be taken into consideration that data explosion is the central
driver of technological innovati on, and so, corporations in order to handle
large volumes of data, exploit cloud where the participating corporations
host their applic ations and data by utilizing machine learning algorithms.146
It seems that new technologies generate new problems due to their function,
and so, a new technology comes to solve the problem, which means that AI
technology has to be effective in solving any malfunction of the technology
and not merely a new techno logy required to address its application
consequences and problems due to its function. On the other hand, AAI
technology will deal with all the problems caused by its function and offes
solution directly , not requir ing a new technology to solve its
misapplications.
1.12 Digital Financial Services
It has to be taken into consideration that the rapid growth of digital financial
services (DFS) has had a transformative impact on the finance of
corporations.147 Julian Gruin148 specifie s that “the rise of Chinese fintech
represents more than a market-based utilization of new financial
technologies in response to an entrenched state-dominated banking system,
but rather constitutes an important institutional foundation in the ongoing
construction of an authoritarian capitalist system.”
China has resisted the limitations of globalized finance, but it endorsed
an acculturated set of strategies to both incorporate and constrai n the power
of globa l financial integration in order to avert macroeconomic risks.
Additionally , the political economy of Chinese fintech encompasses many
dynamics of change within the financial system, leading to the
transformation of social and economic governance structures.149
Financialization utilizes the increasing importance of financial markets,
motives, institutions, and elites  in the operation of the economy and its
governing institutions. As a result, Chinese firms are becoming
financialized, accentuating contact with global professional service
corporations and “best practices” in human resource management and
corporate governance. Moreover , human resource management now
involves the incorporation of AI devices tracking productivity rates and
producing warnings to employees concerning productivity delays.150
Online lending and the rise of digital credit scoring are enabling shifts in
China’ s model of growth and development, thus empowering the
development of new digital economies and markets which means that the
role of finance and the banking system in China’ s economic reform and
development has played a central role. Additionally , the rise of DFS as a
foundation for inclusive financial liberalization denotes a noteworthy move
in the socio-economic reach of the Chinese financial system, along with
newly shaped financial networks and relationships.
In other  words, there is a move from the traditional network of
commercial banks to those overseeing and exploiting the infrastructure of
digital finance itself, and so, databases and data-processing techniques are
embraced. Hence, the rise of Chinese DFS establishes a digital
financialization process embedding technological innovation within the
distinctive political economy of China and exploiting big data technologies,
an econo mic growth model necessitating a competent financial  system and
a retail market environment for digital financial services that maximizes
new openings for socio-eco nomic development while minimizing
interconnected threats to syste mic stability . On the other hand, digital
financialization is generating new instruments for the Chinese government
to supervise both individual and corporate players and employing
algorithmic systems.151
1.13 CBDCs and Global Finance
Private cryptocu rrencies and the upcoming CBDC lead to greater currency
competition, generating regulatory complexities. There is a global drive to
advance the efficiency of cross-border payments. CBDCs are a digital form
of fiat money issued by a centra l bank, and currency substitution diminishes
monetary authorities’  control over national liquidity by limiting the
component over which the authorities have direct influence. Hence,
substitution into CBDCs is no different from conventional “dollarization”
taking place in countries that have experienced high inflation and large
exchange rate volatility . Therefore, the convenience and easier accessibility
of CBDC s facilitate substitution  at a faster pace and larger scale . It could be
said that the CBDC could augm ent the degree of currency substitution in
states that already use a foreign currency , which means that CBDCs could
permit superior control of capita l flows, depending on how they are planned
and the degree of cooperation between the issuer and recipient state.
The increasing approval of CBDCs stems from numerous factors,152 but
their widespread implementation and prospective implications have
introduced concerns regarding the future global financ ial system.
Consequently , the present financial background is certifying an
unprecedented divergence. As more CBDCs circulate in the global market,
the incre ased cybersecurity risk and high monetary mobility would have an
effect on financial stability . CBDCs generate cybersecurity concerns that
vary from those in the current digital financial system covering centralised
financial data, problems with regulatory agencies, augmented complexity in
client key custody , dependence on the integrity of third-party validators
along with difficulty in transaction cancellation, and the prospective for
intensified errors in scope and scale as a result of programmable
transactions.153
Furthermore, CBDCs vest central banks with notable capability to
control monetary policies as they will have abundant data about
countrywide transactions, but such a data-collecting-and-analyzing practice
would subject central banks to a noteworthy privacy invasion concern.154
Hence, cross-border transactions will compel the regulatory necessities for
CBDC security . Thus, the global AML/CFT  requirements for CBDC will
concentrate on the interoperab ility of different CBDC systems and the
capability to trace money flaws through financial intermediaries.
It has to be taken into account that the circulation of different CBDCs in
the global financial network will necessitate central banks to prepare new
rules. Cheng-Y un, Tsang, and Ping-Kuei Chen155 argue that “Geopolitical
concerns on currency sovereignty and competition over fintech innovations
can simultaneously encourage cooperation and confrontation. The central
banks, financial  intermediaries, and private sector should be ready to cope
with significant changes in the global financial order .”
It has to be taken into account that the nature and pace of technological
development are altering the face of globalization and underlining that trade
in nonmaterial goods is subje ct to rapid technological innovation via
distributed ledger technology . Hence, the digitization of trade in goods and
services encompasses the implementation of widespread automated
contracts, and so, the future launch of CBDCs for such cross-border
payment transactions further stimulates the utilization of automated
contracts.
Digitalization simplifies cross-border use of currencies, restruct uring the
demand for and supply of safe assets. Moreover , in terms of demand, an
unequal rate of technological innovations across states or currency blocs,
the appe arance of alternative cross-border payment “rails,” or a transition to
financial intermediation designated in a CBDC or global stablecoin could
shift reserve currencies. In addition, in terms of supply , new digital
platforms could emer ge and reach a global scale, presenting alternative
networks that CBDCs may tap into with the purpose of stimulati ng adoption
upon issuance. Furthermore, CBDCs boost domestic payment systems by
generating security and transparency within the monetary system, reducing
the risks of fraud and money laundering, which means that augmenting
transparency in the flow of money contributes to lowering currency
substitution.
It has to be taken into accou nt that in the area of global finance,
technological advancement alters the interacting dynamics among states
and, as a result, the appearance of fintech has boosted certain countries to
the forefront of global financial centers. However , presently the competition
among fintech centers has not altered the global financial order . Concerning
technology functioning within a jurisdiction, Przemysław Pałka156 argues
that “there is always a politica l decision taken. Regardless of whether it
occurs explicitly through legisla tion, or implicitly , by leaving the decision
to the market, and allowing corporations to write their own rules, some
decision occurs. ” On the other hand, CBDCs are deeply interlinked with
global monetary  territory and circulation, having the prospective to redirect
global capital flows when they become prevalent, not mentioning the
administration of banking by AAI technology functioning entirely on
objectively technical terms without any political intervention will generate
new financial centers grounded  on the level of AAI technology utilized in
various parts of the globe.
The rise of CBD Cs is driven by technological developments in addition
to geo-f inancial concerns.157 Moreov er, technological evolution and geo-
financial inferences supplemented extra complexity to the present global
financial order , restructuring the order . To that extent, coun tries are at
different phases  of financial market development, and so, the interacting
dynamics between cryptocurrency and fiat currency remain unresolved by
many sovereign s. In line with this, Cheng-Y un, Tsang, and Ping-Kuei
Chen158 argue that
“States might utilize CBDCs to fine-tune their monetary
policy or even enable new forms of surveillance capitalism. To
present a balanced view , we also highlighted that
harmonization could be driven by factors such as central
banks’  emphasis on the importance of smooth cross border
transactions, the enforcement of AML/CFT  rules, and the
desire to achieve a more stable financial system…CBDC is
much more than a means of exchanging commodities and
services. Developing CBDCs is hardly a domestic matter ,
especially for major global economies. Once a major economy
launches CBDC and circulates globally , it will soon imply
global financial governance.”
It has to be taken into consideration that the CBDC will compete with bank
deposits in the market for digital money , which means that the CBDC will
crowd out bank deposits, undermining financial stability by lifting the
funding cost and diminishing the profitability of the banking sector. Hence,
the CBDC escalates the deposit demand elasticity with regard to the deposit
rate because households now have more options.159
Taking into account that CBDC will have official government money
status, CBDC will become a critical alternative to cash or bank credit.
CBDC amplifies deposit spreads in this case, making more depositors
choose shadow banks rather than commercial banks. Moreover , loan
origination moves toward shadow banks, which are gaining  share in a
reducing market; thus, transferring loans to shadow banks will cause a
critical allocation of credit risk in a rather vulnerable and unregulated part
of the financial system. To that extent, Dmitry Oskolkov160 argues that
“CBDC is shown to neutralize shadow monetary transmission
channel when banks are unconstrained. While deposit spread
increases in government bond interest rate, it declines in
CBDC rate…increase in CBDC interest rate can act in the
opposite manner to increase in government bond rate. This
indicates that CBDC rate can become a useful instrument for
monetary policy conduction…Firms face increasing loan rates
when CBDC rate grows, but pay less taxes when CBDC rate
is not big.”
Owing to its digital and centra lized nature, CBDC is programmable, and
those who govern the infrastruct ure can alter its qualities, which means that
a central bank can adjust the interest rates, holding limits, and employing
restrictions. Moreover , due to their quality , both data and financial assets
flow around the globe and have a cross-border character . Also,  the success
of CBD C for cross-border transactions depends on the access and
interoperability selections made by central banks; therefore, technological
and legal interoperability is central to CBDC’ s success, which means that a
workable legal framework is needed for the establishment of a stable
financial market infrastructure.
CBDC networks generate increased currency competition and so, CBDC
networks possibly instigate the risk of increased uncertainties .161 On the
other hand, the decentralized structures make it hard to instigate strong
governance measures to stabilize the interchange mechanisms and the
digital identity frameworks. Nonetheless, CBDC networks advance
financial inclusion.162 Hence , CBDC will augment central banks’
effectiveness in conducting monetary policy operations.163
It is worth noting that access to cash remains vital to the public since it is
their only alternative to commercial bank money , an alternative that
becomes vital in times of distress for the banking sector . To that extent,
CBDC will permit central banks to promote further reductions in cash
usage.164
As discu ssed earlier , E-money refers to an “electronic store” of monetary
value on a technical device utilized for making payments.165
Transformations in money have been driven by new technology and
preferences, economic growth, and the need to fulfill socioeconomic
change. Moreov er, digital money , unlike e-money , has no parallel physical
embodiment functioning in a technological environment. A digital and
particularly a tokenized system presents advantages over an electronic
system, and so, payments can be unified, reducing the costs linked with
intermediaries.
It is characteristic that increased payment transparency diminishes
money laundering and tax evasion. It must be taken into account that a
common concer n about CBDC is that transparency lessens tax evasion and
money laundering, but, on the other hand, it presents risks to privacy and
the misuse of the extraordinary new transactional data being generated and
recorded in almost immediate reconciled time. Thus, digital currencies
entail extremely sound and transparent economic governance by central
banks, and very transparent systems for controlling and retrieving the
resulting new economic data.166
Retail CBDCs are seen as digital versions of fiat money drive n by the
need to maintain  the effectiveness of monetary policy , while the use of cash
declines and interest in privat e money flourishes, there is a desire of
advancing transaction efficien cy and so improving accessibility and
financial inclusion.167 Also, CBDCs function as both a medium of exchange
and a store of value, coexisting with other forms of central bank money and
with commercial bank and e-money which means that CBDCs will serve as
a up-to-date counterpart to physical cash.168It seems that CBDCs systems’
design is the capacity to conduct transactions even without network
connectivity169 and so, Offline CBDC transactions will ensure access to
payment functionalities in the absence of a reliable network connection or
for the period of broader system failures.170 It is impractical to preserve
anonymity if a CBDC is issued , and the public nature of a CBDC would
place it at the top of the financia l pyramid. In this context, P. Michalopoulos
et al.171 argue that “offline CBDC transactions with existing hardware and
software technology solutions introduce additional degrees of flexibility to
privacy-related designs that can even emulate the privacy features of
physical cash.”
1.14 ChatGPT and Finance
ChatGPT  is transforming traditional processes while causing unique
challenges, and in finance, ChatGPT  restructures customer interactions by
advancing perso nalized financia l advice, supporting investmen t strategies,
and accelerating real-time market analysis. Hence, ChatGPT  processes huge
data speedily , boosting algorithmic trading, risk management, and fraud
detection. Also, in accounting, AI systems automate data entry ,
categorization, and report generation, reducing human errors and
operational costs and paving the road for supporting forensic accounting
techniques. Nonetheless, ChatGPT  and AI in finance and accounting are
posing ethical dilemmas regarding data privacy , security , and biased
decision-making algorithms, which means that there is a need to make
certain that AI systems adhere to industry standards and regulations while
preserving the integrity and confidentiality of sensitive financial data. Data
security is crucial, and strong cybersecurity measures protect sensitive
financial data. In other words, in finance, ChatGPT  can present
personalized financial advice and support investment strategies by enabling
real-time market analysis. Additionally , ChatGPT  can handle big data
promptly , manage risk, detect fraud, and enhance algorithmic trading. Rane,
Nitin172 argues that
“While ChatGPT  can analyze data and of fer insights, final
decisions in finance often carry profound implications.
Striking the right balance between human judgment and AI-
driven recommendations is vital to avoid excessive reliance on
automated systems, ensuring that human expertise remains
central in critical financial decisions.”
It has to be taken into account that there are concerns about the
accountability of AI-driven financial decisions, necessitating a balance
between human  expertise and machine intelligence. Furthe rmore, the
constant advancement of financial markets requires adapt ability and
continuous learning from AI systems.
ChatGPT  has brought effectiveness, accuracy , and innovation,
transforming the financial industry by processing vast datasets, automating
tasks, and presenting valuable  insights. Processes such as data entry ,
reconciliation, and financial analysis are streamlined, which means
empowering finance authorities to concentrate on strategic decision-
making.173 To that extent, AI-powered chatbots boost customer service,
guaranteeing real-time query resolution.
It is worth notin g that financial reporting encompassing budgeting and
cost analysis follows accounting standards, gains from AI automation,
certifying accur acy and compliance. Moreover , there is a demand for
transparency in AI algorithms guaranteeing that decisions made by AI
systems are explainable and unbiased. Also, AI assists strategic planning via
systematic analysis of financial records and so maintaining financial
integrity . In line with this, Rane, Nitin174 argues that “ChatGPT  can indeed
catalyze positive change, propelling the finance and accounting industries
toward a future marked by ef ficiency , accuracy , and ethical excellence.”
In addition, taxation gains from  AI computation ensure compliance with
changing laws. Moreover , regulatory compliance necessitates aligning AI
with many financial regulations.
1.15 Blockchain and AI in Finance
It has to be taken into conside ration that the conver gence of blockchain
technology and AI is steering in a new age of security and transparency
within the financial sector , which means that this mixture forwards critical
encounters faced by conventional financial systems while also displaying
inventive solutions to enhance efficiency , minimize fraud, and strengthen
transparency . Blockchain has to make certain that once data is recorded, it
remains unaffected by modification, thus delivering an unparalleled level of
security that seems to be challenged by new technologies. Therefore,
blockchain must become an ideal choice for reinforcing financial systems
against cyber threats and fraudulent activities. On the other hand, AI
contributes predictive analytics and automation to the forefront  of financial
operations, enabling real-time data analysis, risk assessment, and decision-
making, heighte ning processes and uplifting overall effective ness. Thus,
blockchain in tandem with AI should boost the precision and dependability
of financial data, fostering a more secure and transparent ecosystem. To that
extent, Rane, Nitin et al.175 argue that
“the transparency ushered in by Blockchain ensures that all
stakeholders have access to a singular version of the truth,
fostering trust in financial transactions. Furthermore, the
incorporation of AI in fraud detection and risk management
heightens the proactive identification of potential threats,
safeguarding financial institutions and their clientele.
It is characterist ic that GNN-based fraud detection models must adhere to
AML, KYC, and GDPR regulations, which means that fraud detection
systems must be transparent and auditable.
In other  words, the merging of blockchain and AI technologies is
triggering a substantial modification in the financial landsca pe, and so,
financial transac tions and data move globally quickly , demandi ng a secure
and transparent financial ecosys tem. In line with this, Rane, Nitin et al.176
say that
“Beyond security and transparency , the integration of
Blockchain and AI redefines the nature of financial
interactions. Smart contracts, powered by Blockchain,
automate and enforce agreements without intermediaries,
expediting processes and reducing the risk of disputes. AI-
driven robo-advisors and personalized financial services
leverage predictive analytics to of fer tailored
recommendations, enhancing customer experiences and
financial outcomes.”
1.16 EU AI Act and Finance
The EU AI Act advances the embracing of AI systems in the EU by
designing a legal framework that offsets the economic opportunities
generated by AI with the demand to tackle the risks that the use of AI
produces in terms of protecting public values177 and the rule of law.178
Moreover , the act relies on an ex-ante assessment by the lawmaker of the
risks linked with some AI technologies. Additionally , Article 10(5)
establishes a new legal basis for processing sensitive personal data on the
basis that existin g rules under EU data protection law were not enough to
permit measures to diminish prospective biases in data utilized to train
algorithms in high-risk contexts. Thus, the EU AI Act reveals a range of
compromises and trade-of fs.179
It has to be taken into account that the EU AI Act applies horizontally
and its horizont ality means all domains covered by EU law, and so, AI
systems used by financial institutions180 and by the financial sector are
covered by the Act which means that systems used to evaluate
creditworthiness, credit scores, and risk assessments fall into the high-risk
category . Hence, the EU AI Act integrates its new obligations into standing
procedures for financial supervision.181 In addition, the EU AI Act
promotes the use of AI while preserving public values and forcing national
authorities to adopt measures to support innovation. To that extent, Marco
Almada182 argues that
“In order to carry out their duties in the age of AI, financial
supervisory authorities need to develop additional capabilities.
They need to foster technical competencies in AI, and the
legal expertise required to navigate risks to fundamental rights
that fall outside their traditional remit.”
It is characteris tic that the EU AI Act183 initiate s a new category of AI
systems named GPAI models, exposing considerable generality , but they
accomplish a wide range of missions by prioritizing transparency and
accountability and so, presenting technical documentation, instructions for
use, and revealing training data while respecting copyright, which means
lessening prospe ctive risks and advancing trust within the AI society .184
Furthermore, the EU AI Act states that institutions are subject to
governance prerequisites and processes under EU financial law, thus
accomplishing certain obligations defined in the regulation, subject to
particular provisions regarding risk management and market monitoring. In
fact, financial institutions have  to keep documentation under EU law on
financial services.185 Besides, Kilian, Robert186 et al. ar gue that
“the EU risks creating an uneven playing field that could
significantly hinder innovation in the European AI ecosystem.
Additionally , the amount and complexity of technical
standards considered or developed as standardization
deliverables should be reduced to make them more
practicable.”
Furthermore, the EU AI Act endorses regulatory frameworks to keep pace
with technologic al advancements, and the risks linked with GPAI systems
extend far beyond the narrow alarms of data quality and bias encompassing
copyright violations, the misuse of AI-generated content, the creation of
deepfakes, and the range of misinformation and disinformation utilized in
creating highly realistic fake images and videos, setting contests for
regulators due to the difficulti es in distinguishing between human and
synthetic content, particularly when it is distributed at scale.
Notes
1. X. Zhu, S. Asimakopoulos, and J. Kim, Financial Development
and Innovation-led Growth: Is Too Much Finance Better? 100
Journal of International Money and Finance  102083 (2020). ⏎
2. D. Kimani, K. Adams, R. Attah-Baakye, S. Ullah, J. Frecknall-
Hughes, and J. Kim, Blockchain, Business and the Fourth
Industrial Revolution: Whence, Whither , Wherefore and
How?, 161 Technological For ecasting and Social Change
120254 (2020). ⏎
3. Jessica E. Lees, Regulatory Influence in the Financial Markets
Revisited, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4804768 . ⏎
4. Olga T. Cherney , Zhanna V. Smirnova Alexander P . Garin,
Elena V. Romanovskaya, and Yuri A. Sidorenko, The Main
Components of the Innovation Audit of the Economy , in E. N.
Makarenko et al. (eds), Technological T rends in the AI
Economy , Smart Innovation, Systems and T echnologies
(Singapore: Springer Nature Pvt Ltd., 2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1007/978-981-19-741 1-3_12  P117. ⏎
5. Saule T. Omarova, New Tech v . New Deal: Fintech as a
Systemic Phenomenon, 36 YALE J. ON REGUL. 735 (2019). ⏎
6. Saule T. Omarova, Technology v Technocracy: Fintech as a
Regulatory Challenge, 6 J. FIN. REGUL. 75, 76 (2020). Saule
T. Omarova, The People’ s Ledger: How to Democratize
Money and Finance the Economy , 74 Vanderbilt Law Review
1232, https://scholarship.law .vanderbilt.edu/vlr/vol74/iss5/1 . ⏎
7. Kenneth Krushel, Geopolitics in the Era of AI: Upending
assumptions, ESCP  Impact Paper N°2022-13-EN P101. ⏎
8. N. Economides, The Economics of Networks, 14(6)
International Journal of Industrial Or ganization  673–699
(1996). ⏎
9. Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer -To-Peer Electronic Cash
System 1 (2016), https://bitcoin.or g/bitcoin.pdf
https://perma.cc/H96W -5LJ6  Proof of Work, BITCOIN WIKI,
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Proof_of_work . ⏎
10. Leah McGrath Goodman, The Face Behind Bitcoin,
NEWSWEEK (Mar . 6, 2014),
http://www .newsweek.com/2014/03/14/face-behind-bitcoin-
247957.html . L. S., How Bitcoin Mining Works, The
Economist  (Jan. 20, 2015),
http://www .economist.com/blogs/economistexplains/2015/01/e
conomist-explains-1 1. ⏎
11. Jonathan M. Barnett, The Host’ s Dilemma: Strategic Forfeiture
in Platform Markets for Informational Goods, 124 Harv . L.
Rev. 1861, 1907 (201 1) (“Like other successful open source
projects, Linux code development is governed by a strict
hierarchy , in which a limited core of qualified developers…
develop code and approve changes to the code. These core
developers are in turn assisted by reports of ‘bugs’  and ‘fixes’
contributed by a lar ger mass of participants.”). ⏎
12. ECLI:ES:TS:2019:2109,
http://www .poderjudicial.es/search/indexAN.jsp . ⏎
13. L. Van Hove, Metcalfe’ s Law and Network Quality: An
Extension of Zhang et al., 37(1) Journal  of Computer Science
and T echnology  117–123 (January 2016). ⏎
14. Case C-264/14, Hedqvist case, 2015, ECLI:EU:C:2015:718,
fot. 12. ⏎
15. CJEU C-389/17, Case Paysera, 2019, ECLI:EU:C:2019:25,
fto. 24. ⏎
16. Opinion of Advocate General M. WATHELET , 2018, Case C-
389/17, Paysera L T judgment, fot.53. ⏎
17. John O. McGinnis, Two Paradoxes of Crypto, 2023 Chapman
Law Review Vol. 26:2 /445 p450, 451. ⏎
18. R. April, A Proposal of a New Pattern for a Land Registry
Based on Blockchain Technology , 28 Derecom 65–94
(2020). ⏎
19. M. Scharnowski, S. Scharnowski, and L. Zimmermann, Fan
Tokens: Sports and Speculation on the Blockchain, 89 Journal
of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money
(2023), https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.intfin.2023.101880 . ⏎
20. Betsy Vereckey , Who Will Regulate Crypto and FinT ech in the
US?, Mit Mgmt. Sloan School (Nov . 8, 2022),
http://perma.cc/Q5CP-ENF2 . ⏎
21. Michael Conklin, Driving a Stake Through Corporate
Cryptocurrency Involvement: Why the Practice Fails the
Stakeholder Ethical Analysis, 69 Wayne Law Review  145,
P146, 168 (2024). ⏎
22. D. A. Wallach, Bitcoin for Rockstars: How Cryptocurrency
Can Revolutionize the Music Industry , MEDIUM (Dec. 10,
2014), https://medium.com/backchannel/bitcoin-for -
rockstarsca8366802f9 . ⏎
23. BITW AGE, www .bitwage.co  (a Bitcoin-based payment system
allowing employees to be paid in micro amounts over a pay
period). ⏎
24. Crypto-Currency Market Capitalizations,
https://coinmarketcap.com/ . ⏎
25. Contracts , Bitcoin Foundation WIKI,
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Contracts . ⏎
26. Market  Capitalization , Blockchain,
https://blockchain.info/charts/market-cap?
timespan=all&daysA verageString=1&scale=1&address= . ⏎
27. Stephen T. Middlebrook and Sarah Jane Hughes, Regulating
Cryptocurrencies in the United States: Current Issues and
Future Directions, 40 Wm. Mitchell L. Rev . 813, 819–820
(2014). ⏎
28. Sarah Murray and Elizabeth Butler , Cryptocurrency—Is It
Recognised as “Property” under English Law?, Stevens &
Bolton  (Jun. 10, 2022). ⏎
29. English High Court in AA v. Persons Unknown and Others, Re
Bitcoin [2019] EWHC 3556 (Comm). ⏎
30. [2020] SGCA(I) 02. ⏎
31. Ruscoe v Cryptopia Ltd (in Liquidation) [2020] NZHC 728. ⏎
32. Adetomiwa Fowowe, Cryptocurrency: Legal Analysis on the
Future of Financing International Commerce,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4792357  p. 14. A. I. Fowowe, The
Governance or Otherwise of Cryptocurrency in the Sales of
Goods Act, 1893, (2021), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833672 . ⏎
33. New York Times, Whispers of Return to Drachma Grow
Louder in Greek Crisis. By Landon, T, Nov . 1st Edition
(2011). ⏎
34. Paul Krugman, Bitcoin Is Evil, New Y ork T imes,  December
28th Edition (2013). ⏎
35. N. R. Kocherlakota, Money Is Memory , 81 Journal of
Economic Theory  232–251 (1998). ⏎
36. Maria Bigoni, Gabriele Camera, and Marco Casari, Money Is
More Than Memory , October 27, 2014 No. 496, P  31–33. ⏎
37. G. Zekos, Monetary Policy and Risk Management in Financial
Globalization (New York: Nova Science Publications, 2015),
https://novapublishers.com/shop/monetary-policy-and-risk-
management-in-financial-globalization/ . ⏎
38. Adam J. Levitin, Safe Banking, 2015,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2532703 . ⏎
39. Morgan Ricks, Entry Restriction, Shadow Banking, and the
Structure of Monetary Institutions, 2 J. FIN. REG.  291
(2016). ⏎
40. Morgan Ricks, Money , Private Law , and Macroeconomic
Disasters, 83 Law and Contemporary Pr oblems  P81 (2020). ⏎
41. Hans Gersbach, Hans Haller , and Stylianos Papageor giou,
Regulatory Competition in Banking: Curse or Blessing? 2020
Journal of Banking & Finance  105954 (2020). ⏎
42. Article 2.e of Directive 2009/1 10/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the
taking up, pursuit, and prudential supervision of the business
of electronic money institutions, amending Directives
2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and repealing Directive
2000/46/EC. ⏎
43. European Cent. Bank, Virtual Currency Schemes—A  Further
Analysis 15 (2015),
https://www .ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrencyschem
esen.pdf . ⏎
44. 31 C.F .R. § 1010.100(m) (2016). U.S. Dep’ t of the Treasury ,
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Guidance Note FIN-
2013-G001 (Mar . 18, 2013),
https://www .fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/FIN-2013-
G001.pdf . ⏎
45. U.S. Dep’ t of the Treasury , Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network, Guidance Note FIN-2013-G001 (Mar . 18, 2013),
https://www .fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/FIN-2013-
G001.pdf . R. J. Straus, The FinCEN Virtual Currency
Guidance: Neutering Bitcoin?, 7(4) E-Finance & Payments
Law & Policy  9 (2013). ⏎
46. SEC Chairman Jay Clayton and CFTC Chairman J.
Christopher Giancarlo, Regulators Are Looking at
Cryptocurrency: At the SEC and CFTC We Take Our
Responsibility Seriously , Wall Str eet Journal  (Jan. 24, 2018),
https://www .wsj.com/articles/regulators-arelooking-at-
cryptocurrency-1516836363 . ⏎
47. Securities and Exchange Commission, Of fice of Investor
Education and Advocacy , Ponzi Schemes Using Virtual
Currencies, July 2013. Securities and Exchange Commission,
Office of Investor Education and Advocacy , Investor Alert:
Bitcoin and Other Virtual Currency-Related Investments (May
7, 2015), https://investor .gov/additional-resources/news-
alerts/alerts-bulletins/investor -alert-bitcoin-other -virtual-
currency . ⏎
48. Joint Statement by SEC and CFTC Enforcement Directors
Regarding Virtual Currency Enforcement Actions, Jan. 19,
2018. SEC Press Rel. 2018-23, Feb. 21, 2018. SEC Files Fraud
Char ges in Bitcoin and Of fice Space Investment Schemes,
SEC Rel. 2017-123, June 30, 2017. ⏎
49. A. Hayes, Competing Imaginaries: Crypto-utopianism and the
Material Forces of Bitcoin Mining, 39(4) Anthr opol. T oday  4–
8 (2023), https://doi.or g/10.1 111/1467-8322.12825 . ⏎
50. SEC v . Shavers, 2014 WL 4652121 (E.D. Tex. 2014); ⏎
51. In re Coinflip, Inc., CFTC No. 15-29 (Sept. 17, 2015) (finding
that digital currency qualifies as a commodity under 7 U.S.C. §
1a(9)). ⏎
52. In re TeraExchange LLC, CFTC Docket No. 15-33 (Sept. 24,
2015); ⏎
53. Investor  Alert: Bitcoin: Mor e Than a Bit Risky , FINRA  (May
7, 2014), http://www .finra.or g/investors/alerts/bitcoin-more-
bit-risky . ⏎
54. Security and Exchange Commission, Release No. 71568 (Feb.
19, 2014), https://www .sec.gov/litigation/suspensions/2014/34-
71568.pdf . ⏎
55. SEC v . Shavers, No. 4:13-CV -416, 2013 WL 4028182, (E.D.
Tex. 2013), reconsideration aff ’d, No. 4:13-CV -416, 2014 WL
12622292 (E.D. Tex.2014). ⏎
56. 15 U.S.C. §§ 77t, 77v (2012). Registration Under the
Securities Act of 1933, U.S. Sec. & Exch. Comm’n,
http://www .sec.gov/answers/regis33.htm  15 U.S.C. §§ 78u,
78aa (2012). ⏎
57. SEC v . Garza, No. 3:15-CV -01760, 2015 WL 7732649 (D.
Conn., Complaint filed Dec. 1, 2015) (“[Defendant’ s Bitcoin
products] constitute investment contracts and thus ‘securities’
under Section 2(a)(1) [15 U.S.C. §77b(1)] of the Securities
Act.”). ⏎
58. SEC v . W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946). United States v .
Faiella, 39 F . Supp. 3d 544 (S.D.N.Y . 2014); United States v .
Budovsky , No. 13CR368 DLC, 2015 WL 5602853, at *1
(S.D.N.Y . 2015); United States v . Mur gio, No. 15-CR-769
(AJN), 2016 WL 5107128 (S.D.N.Y . 2016) (none ar guing that
Bitcoin does not satisfy the “investment contract”
definition). ⏎
59. 15 U.S.C. § 77a (1933). 15 U.S.C. § 78j(b) (2012). 17 C.F .R. §
240.10b-5(b) (2015). SEC v . Mor gan Keegan & Co., Inc., 678
F.3d 1233, 1244 (1 1th Cir . 2012). ⏎
60. Dep’ t of Justice, https://www .justice.gov/opa/pr/odebrecht-
and-braskem-plead-guilty-and-agreepay-least-35-billion-
global-penalties-resolve . ⏎
61. See Linda Chatman Thomsen, Deputy Director , Division of
Enforcement, SEC, An Overview of Enforcement, SEC,
https://www .sec.gov/about/of fices/oia/oia_enforce/overviewen
for.pdf. ⏎
62. Nathaniel Popper , S.E.C. Rejects Winklevoss Brothers’  Bid to
Create Bitcoin E.T .F., THE N.Y . Times (Mar . 10, 2017),
https://www .nytimes.com/2017/03/10/business/dealbook/wink
elvoss-brothersbid-to-create-a-bitcoin-etf-is-rejected.html?
_r=0 . ⏎
63. Andrew Verstein, Crypto Assets and Insider Trading Law’ s
Domain, 105 Iowa L. Rev . 1, 9 (2019); J. S. Nelson,
Cryptocommunity Currencies, 105 Cornell L. Rev . 909, 934–
935 (2020); Eric D. Chason, Smart Contracts and the Limits of
Computerized Commerce, 99 Neb. L. Rev . 330, 363–364
(2020). ⏎
64. Robert Sistoso, Post-Etherdelta: Clarifying Liabilities for
Cryptocurrency Exchanges and Market Participants, 39
Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 343, 354 (2021) (“If a cryptocurrency
token is decentralized such that purchasers’  expectation of
profits rests, not on a person or group, but in an autonomous
network or structure, the token fails to satisfy the Howey test
as an investment contract and would not constitute a
security .”); In re Tether & Bitfinex Crypto Asset Litig., 576 F .
Supp. 3d 55, 71 (S.D.N.Y . 2021) (“USDT…[is] a ‘stablecoin,’
so called because it is purportedly pegged to and backed by
U.S. dollars held in reserve by Tether .”). ⏎
65. Usha R. Rodrigues, Embrace the SEC, 61 Wash. U. J.L. &
Pol’y 133, 147–148 (2020) (“For their part, ICO enthusiasts
need to understand the SEC’ s perspective. For decades, the
SEC has labored to protect the general public from the hype of
risky of ferings, worried that grandma will lose her savings to
unscrupulous promoters. The SEC has tar geted extremely
troubling of ferings.”). ⏎
66. Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, Financial Regulation in a
System Context (2008), https://www .brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2008/09/2008b_bpea_morris.pdf . ⏎
67. Michael Woodford, Central Bank Communication and Policy
Effectiveness, in Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Economic Symposium at Jackson Hole (2005),
http://www .kc.frb.or g/publicat/sympos/2005/sym05pr g.htm . ⏎
68. Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, Has Government Any
Role in Money? http://www .nber .org/chapters/c7507  Chapter
pages in book: (p. 289—314) University of Chicago Press
(1987) p. 31 1. ⏎
69. Frederic S. Mishkin, Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from
the Crisis January 201 1 ECB, p. 50, Central Banking
Conference, Monetary Policy Revisited: Lessons from the
Crisis, Frankfurt, November 18–19, 2010. ⏎
70. Yener Altunbas, Leonardo Gambacorta, and David Marqués-
Ibáñez, Bank Risk and Monetary Policy Working Papers
Number 712—May 2009. ⏎
71. Yener Altunbas, Leonardo Gambacorta, and David Marqués-
Ibáñez, Bank Risk and Monetary Policy Working Papers
Number 712—May 2009. ⏎
72. C. Borio and H. Zhu, Capital Regulation, Risk-T aking and
Monetary Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission
Mechanism?, BIS Working Papers, No. 268 (2008). ⏎
73. N. Rajan, Has Financial Development Made the World
Riskier?, NBER Working Paper Series No. 1 1728 (2005). ⏎
74. Wolfgang Breuer and Andreas Knetsch, Recent Trends in the
Digitalization of Finance and Accounting, 93 Journal of
Business Economics 1451–1461 (2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1007/s1 1573-023-01 181-5  p 1454. ⏎
75. R. Nunes, Adoption of Cryptocurrency and Abandonment of
Monetary Policy: An Analysis in the Light of Economic
Theory , 28(1 1) IOSR Journal of Humanities and Social
Science  30–36 (2023). ⏎
76. Salam Alshareef, The Gulf ’s Shifting Geoeconomy and
China’ s Structural Power: From the Petrodollar to the
Petroyuan? 27(2) Competition and
Change ,https://doi.or g/10.1 177/10245294221095222 .
https://journals.sagepub.com/home/CCH  (The ef fectiveness of
the petrodollar regime has been significantly reduced as China
has overtaken the United States as the lar gest destination for
the recycling of oil receipts from the GCC through the trade
channel.) ⏎
77. G. T. Chin and K. P . Gallagher , Coordinated Credit Spaces:
The Globalization of Chinese Development Finance, 50(1)
Development and Change 254–274 (2019). ⏎
78. Osama Wagdi, Akram Elnahrawy , and Atef Fathi, Petrodollar
and De-dollarization: A Survey from OAPEC Countries, 449
E3S W eb of Confer ences  02008 (2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1051/e3sconf/202344902008  p1. ⏎
79. Yayaj. Fanusie and Emilyjin, China’ s Digital Currency:
Adding Financial Data to Digital Authoritarianism 1 (2021). ⏎
80. Lan Cao, Dollar Trap and Digital Currency , 26(2) Chapman
Law Review  503 P555 (2023). ⏎
81. M. Z. Iqbal and A. G. Campbell, Metaverse as Tech for Good:
Current Progress and Emer ging Opportunities, 2(4) Virtual
Worlds  326–342 (2023). ⏎
82. D. Vidal-T omás, The Illusion of the Metaverse and Meta-
economy , 86 International Review of Financial Analysis
102560 (2023). ⏎
83. Codice civile, RD 16 March 1942, n. 262. ⏎
84. Art. 65 French Loi n. 486 regulated (bien incorporel)
Rampone, F ., Token, between crypto-assets and other digital
elements, 10/04/2020
(https://www .blockchain4innovation.it/esperti/token-tra-cripto-
asset-e-altri-elementi-digitali/ ⏎
85. K. B. Ooi, G. W. H. Tan, E. CH. X. Aw, T. H. Cham, R.
Dwivedi, L. Hughes, K. A. Kar , X. M. Loh, E. Mogaji, I. Phau,
and A. Sharma, Banking in the Metaverse: A New Frontier for
Financial Institutions, 41(7) International Journal of Bank
Marketing  1829–1846 (2023). ⏎
86. Deniz Güven, Step Inside Our Hong Kong Virtual Bank,
Standar d Charter ed (May 29, 2019),
https://www .sc.com/en/navigate-the-future/hong-kong-virtual-
bank/  [https://perma.cc/S8KL  9G65]. ⏎
87. John Callahan, Know Your Customer (KYC) Will Be a Great
Thing When It Works, Forbes (July 10, 2018),
https://perma.cc/L48R-PMFL . ⏎
88. Combating Financial Crime, KPMG (Mar . 2019),
https://home.kpmg/xx/en/home/insights/2019/03/combating-
financial-crime-fs.html  [https://perma.cc/W99N-677A ]. ⏎
89. M. MacDonald, The Intersection between IP  and the
Metaverse: Preliminary Observations, Queen Mary Law
Research Paper No. 397/2023, January 26, 2023,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4338884 . C. Macedo et al., The
Metaverse: From Science Fiction to Commercial Reality—
Protecting Intellectual Property in the Virtual Landscape, 31(1)
NYSBA  13–20 (2022). ⏎
90. Gaetano Dimita, Yin Harn Lee, Michaela MacDonald,
Anthony Michael Catton, Zeynep Kubra Kavcar Penbegullu,
and Juan Alberto Pulido Lock, IP  and Metaverse(s)—An
Externally Commissioned Research Report, Queen Mary Law
Research Paper No. 427/2024. ⏎
91. F. Mostert and W. Yeoh, Meta-worse, a Lawyer ’s Mega
Paradise, 17(3)  Journal of Intellectual Pr operty Law &
Practice  211–212 (2022),
https://doi.or g/10.1093/jiplp/jpac00 . ⏎
92. Andrea M. Matawyshn, Material Vulnerabilities: Data Privacy ,
Corporate Information Security , and Securities Regulation, 3
Berkeley Bus. L.J. 129, 145 (2005). ⏎
93. T. Huynh-The, Q. Pham, X. Pham, T. Nguyen, Z. Han, and D.
Kim, Artificial Intelligence for the Metaverse: A Survey , 117
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 105581
(2023). ⏎
94. B. Hammi, S. Zeadally , and A. Perez, Non-fungible Tokens: A
Review , 6(1) IEEE Internet of Things Magazine  46–50
(2023). ⏎
95. Chen Jun and Dr . Danny Friedmann, Jumping from Mother
Monkey to Bored Ape: The Value of NFT s from an Artist’ s and
Intellectual Property Perspective,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4213536  P45. ⏎
96. Joerg Osterrieder , Stephen Chan, Yuanyuan Zhang, and Jef frey
Chu, Metaverse Non-Fungible Tokens, at:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4733153  p. 26 ⏎
97. I. Yousaf, A. Abrar , and L. Yarovaya, Decentralized and
Centralized Exchanges: Which Digital Tokens Pose a Greater
Contagion Risk? Journal of International Financial Markets,
Institutions and Money  (2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.intfin.2023.101881 . ⏎
98. Suliman Alshahmy , Arnaz Binsardi, and Padmi
Nagirikandalage, Relationship between the Pricing and
Trading of Cryptocurrencies and the Collectible, Metaverse,
and Art Non-Fungible Token Subcategories,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4801958  P6. ⏎
99. Weiwei Guo et al., The British Accounting Review ,
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.bar .2025.101641  p1. ⏎
100. R. Wilson Freyermuth, Christopher K. Odinet, and Andrea
Tosato, Crypto in Real Estate Finance, 75(1) Alabama Law
Review 93 P94 (2023). ⏎
101. Dirk A. Zetzsche, Douglas Arner , Ross Buckley , and Brian W.
Tang, Artificial Intelligence in Finance: Putting the Human in
the Loop, https://ssrn.com/abstract=353171 1 P3. ⏎
102. Margot E. Kaminski and Jennifer M. Urban, The Right to
Contest AI, 121 COLUM. L. REV . 1957 (2021). ⏎
103. Brandon L. Garrett and Cynthia Rudin, The Right to a Glass
Box: Rethinking the Use of Artificial Intelligence in Criminal
Justice, 109 Cornell Law Review  561 p. 627 (2024). ⏎
104. Nico Lehnertz, Carolin Plagmann, and Eva Lutz, Why Deep
Pockets Make Great Borrowers: An Empirical Analysis of
Venture Loans, 92 Journal of Business Economics  1431–1453
P1431 (2022), https://doi.or g/10.1007/s1 1573-022-01084-x . ⏎
105. Y. V. Hochber g, C. J. Serrano, and R. H. Ziedonis, Patent
Collateral, Investor Commitment, and the Market for Venture
Lending, 130 J Financ Econ 74–94 (2018),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.jfneco.2018.06.003 ⏎
106. F. Bertoni, M. G. Colombo, A. Quas, and F . Tenca, The
Changing Patterns of Venture Capital Investments in Europe,
46 J Ind Bus Econ  229–250 (2019),
https://doi.or g/10.1007/s40812-019-001 13-1. ⏎
107. L. Zhang, Y. Guo, and G. Sun, How Patent Signals Affect
Venture Capital: The Evidence of Bio-pharmaceutical Start-ups
in China, 145 Technol For ecast Soc Change  93–104 (2019),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.05.013 . ⏎
108. Maximilian Germann and Christoph Merkle, Algorithm
Aversion in Delegated Investing, 93 Journal of Business
Economics 1691–1727 p169. 1 (2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1007/s1 1573-022-01 121-9 . ⏎
109. A. V. Thakor , Fintech and Banking: What Do We Know?, 41  J
Financ Intermed  100, 833 (2020). ⏎
110. S. Raisch and S. Krakowski, Artificial Intelligence and
Management: The Automation–augmentation Paradox, 46(1)
Academy of Management Review  192–210 (2021). ⏎
111. S. M. Chew and F . Spiegl, Security Token Of fering—New
Way of Financing in the Digital Era, 52. Journal of Financial
Transformation  142–151 (2021). D. A. Zetzsche, D. W. Arner ,
and R. P . Buckley , Decentralized Finance, 6(2) Journal of
Financial Regulation  172–203 (2020). ⏎
112. Yan Chen, Jack I. Richter , and Pankaj C. Patel, Decentralized
Governance of Digital Platforms, 47(5) Journal of
Management  1305–1337 p 1305 (May 2021). ⏎
113. T. Lambert, D. Liebau, and P . Roosenboom, Security Token
Offerings, Small Business Economics  (2021),
https://doi.or g/10.1007/s1 1187-021-00539-9 . ⏎
114. L. Ante, Blockchain-based Tokens as Financing Instruments:
Capital Market Access for SMEs?, in I. A. Boitan and K.
Marchewka-Bartkowiak (eds), Fostering Innovation and
Competitiveness with FinT ech, RegT ech, and SupT ech
(Hershey , PA: IGI Global, 2021), pp. 129–141. ⏎
115. R. Belchior , A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia, A
Survey on Blockchain Interoperability: Past, Present, and
Future Trends, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14282 (2020). ⏎
116. Wolfgang Breuer and Andreas Pfngsten, Non Standard Issues
in Business Finance: An Overview , 92 Journal of Business
Economics  1417–1430 (2022), https://doi.or g/10.1007/s1 1573-
022-01 122-8 . ⏎
117. A. Sunyaev , N. Kannengießer , R. Beck, H. Treiblmaier , M.
Lacity , J. Kranz, G. Fridgen, U. Spankowski, and A. Luckow
Token Economy , 63(4) Business & Information Systems
Engineering  457–478 (2021), https://doi.or g/10.1007/s12599-
021-00684-1 . ⏎
118. Y. Chen, I. Pereira, and P . C. Patel, Decentralized Governance
of Digital Platforms, 47(5) Journal of Management  1305–1337
(2020), https://doi.or g/10.1 177/0149206320916755 . ⏎
119. Y. Wang, Automated Market Makers for Decentralized Finance
(DeFi), arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01676 (2020). ⏎
120. R. H. Weber, Non-fungible Tokens—A  New (Legal)
Phenomenon in the Crypto Uuniverse. Sic 487–496. ⏎
121. A. Whitaker and R. Kräussl, Fractional Equity , Blockchain,
and the Future of Creative Work, 66(10) Management Science
4594–461 1 (2020). ⏎
122. World Economic Forum, & Accenture, Modernizing Financial
Markets with Wholesale Central Bank Digital Currency
(wCBDC) (2024),
https://www .weforum.or g/publications/modernizing-financial-
markets-with-wcbdc/ . ⏎
123. Rosa M. Garcia-T eruel and Héctor Simón-Moreno, The Digital
Tokenization of Property Rights. A Comparative Perspective,
41 Computer Law & Security Review  105543 (2021) p1,
www .elsevier .com/locate/CLSR . ⏎
124. Darian M. Ibrahim, A Tokenized Future: Regulatory Lessons
from Crowdfunding and Standard Form Contracts, 74 Hastings
Law Journal  45 p. 45 (2022). ⏎
125. Barry Friedman, Farhang Heydari, Max Isaacs, and Katie
Kinsey , Policing Police Tech: A Soft Law Solution, 37
Berkeley T ech. L.J. 701, 1 17 (2022). Niels van Dijk, Simone
Casiraghi, and Ser ge Gutwirth, The ‘Ethification’  of ICT
Governance. Artificial Intelligence and Data Protection in the
European Union, 43 Comput. L. & Sec. Rev . 1, 7 (2021). ⏎
126. D. Cumming, G. Leboeuf, and A. Schwienbacher ,
Crowdfunding Models: Keep-it All vs. All-or -nothing, 49(2)
Financial Management  331–360 (2020),
https://doi.or g/10.1 111/fima.12262 . ⏎
127. G. Borello, V. De Crescenzo, and F . Pichler , Factors for
Success in European Crowdinvesting, 106 Journal of
Economics and Business  1–19 (2019),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j .jeconbus.2019.05.002. ⏎
128. S. Ribeiro-Navarrete, D. Palacios-Marqués, C. Lassala, and K.
Ulrich, Key Factors of Information Management for
Crowdfunding Investor Satisfaction, 59 International Journal
of Information Management  1–10 (2021),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102354 . ⏎
129. D. J. Cumming and L. Hornuf, The Economics of
Crowdfunding: Startups, Portals and Investor Behavior  (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018). ⏎
130. H. Tang, Peer -to-peer Lenders versus Banks: Substitutes or
Complements? 32 The Review of Financial Studies  1900–1938
(2019). ⏎
131. Z. Zhang, W. Hu, and T. Chang, Nonlinear Ef fects of P2P
Lending on Bank Loans in a Panel Smooth Transition
Regression Model, 59 International Review of Economics &
Finance  468–473 (2019). ⏎
132. W. Breuer , C. K. Soypak, and B. I. Steininger , Magnitude
Effects in Lending and Borrowing: Empirical Evidence from a
P2P Platform, The Eur opean Journal of Finance  (2020),
https://doi.or g/10.1080/1351847X.2019.1709525 . ⏎
133. Darian M. Ibrahim, Underwriting Crowdfunding, 25 Stan. J.L.
Bus. & Fin.  289, 300–301 (2020) (“[S]tartups can only
disclose so much given they are so young.”). Chris Brummer ,
Disclosure, Dapps and DeFi, 5 Stan. J. Blockchain L. & Pol’y
137, 147 (2022) (“[T]he document[s] initial issuers of
securities file with the SEC to disclose key facts about their
business[] fail to anticipate decentralized architectures, and are
both over - and under -inclusive in terms of the disclosure
requirements that one would expect of issuers of blockchain-
based securities.”). ⏎
134. Geor gios Dimitropoulos, The Law of Blockchain, 95 Wash. L.
Rev. 1117, 1 128 (2020) (“Before a block can be added to the
chain, a cryptographic puzzle must be solved, creating the
block. Miners are special nodes that place transactions in a
block by successfully solving a Proof of Work (PoW) or other
problems.”). ⏎
135. Andrew A. Schwartz, Mandatory Disclosure in Primary
Markets, 2019 UTAH L. REV . 1069, 1076 (2019) (“Mandatory
disclosure imposes such significant costs that it deters many
companies, especially small ones, from conducting an IPO in
the first place.”). ⏎
136. Cumming, D., G. Leboeuf, and A. Schwienbacher ,
Crowdfunding Models: Keep-It-All vs. All-Or -Nothing, 49(2)
Financial Management  331–360 (2020),
https://doi.or g/10.1 111/fima.12262 . ⏎
137. Jerry Coakley and Winifred Huang, P2P  Lending and Outside
Entrepreneurial Finance, 29(13) The Eur opean Journal of
Finance  1520–1537 (2023),
https://doi.or g/10.1080/1351847X.2020.184222  P1520. ⏎
138. Arun Adwani, Foundations of Fintech: Navigating the Digital
Financial Revolution  (Red Unicorn Publishing Pvt. Ltd.,
2025). ⏎
139. Julian Franks, Nicolas Serrano-V elarde, and Oren Sussman,
Marketplace Lending, Information Aggregation, and Liquidity ,
Finance Working Paper No. 678/2020 p 1. ⏎
140. Ressita Ramadhani, Zakka Farisy , and Dina Silvia Puteri,
Comparative Analysis of CBDC and Tax Law Enforcement in
Selected Countries, 4(1) Journal of Central Banking Law and
Institutions  141–180 (2025). ⏎
141. D. A. Zetzsche, D. W. Arner , and R. P . Buckley , Decentralized
Finance, 6(2) Journal of Financial Regulation  172–203
(2020). ⏎
142. D. G. Baur , K. Hong, and A. D. Lee, Bitcoin: Medium of
Exchange or Speculative Assets? 54 Journal of International
Financial Markets, Institutions and Money  177–189 (2018),
https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.intfin.2017.12.004 . ⏎
143. V. I. Gromyko and N. S. Vasilyev , Mathematical Modeling of
Deep-learned Artificial Intelligence and Axiomatic for System-
informational Culture, 4(4) Int. J. Robot. Autom.  245–246
(2018). ⏎
144. A. McAfee, E. Brynjolfsson, T. H. Davenport, D. J. Patil, and
D. Barton, Big Data: The Management Revolution, 90(10)
Harvar d Bus. Rev . 60–68 (2012). X. Wu, X. Zhu, G. Q. Wu,
and W. Ding, Data Mining with Big Data, 26(1)  IEEE T rans.
Knowl. Data Eng.  97–107 (2014). A. A. Tole, Big Data
Challenges, 4(3) Database Syst. J.  31–40 (2013). ⏎
145. U. S. Förster -Metz, K. Marquardt, N. Golowko, A. Kompalla,
and C. Hell, Digital Transformation and its Implications on
Organizational Behavior , J. EU Res. Bus.  (2018),
https://doi.or g/10.5171/2018.340873 . ⏎
146. V. Chung, M. Dietz, I. Rab, and Z. Townsend, McKinsey
Quarterly Ecosystem 2.0: Climbing to the Next Level (2020),
https://www .mckinsey .com/business-functions/mckinsey-
digital/our -insights/ecosystem-2-point-0-climbing-to-the-next-
level# . ⏎
147. S. Claessens, J. Frost, G. Turner , and Z. Feng, Fintech Credit
Markets Around the World: Size, Drivers and Policy Issues,
BIS Quarterly Review , September: 29–49 (2018). ⏎
148. Julian Gruin, Financializing Authoritarian Capitalism: Chinese
Fintech and the Institutional Foundations of Algorithmic
Governance, 5(2) Finance and Society  84–104 P85 (2019). ⏎
149. J. Gruin, Communists Constructing Capitalism: State, Market,
and the Party in China’ s Financial Reform  (Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 2019). ⏎
150. A.-S. Mayer , F. Strich, and M. Fiedler , Unintended
Consequences of Introducing AI Systems for Decision
Making, 19(4) MIS Quarterly Executive  237–257 (2020). ⏎
151. J. Wang, Inclusion or Expulsion: Digital Technologies and the
New Power Relations in China’ s ‘Internet Finance’, 3(1)
Communication and the Public  34–45 (2018). ⏎
152. Tao Zhang, New Forms of Digital Money: Implications for
Monetary and Financial Stability (2020),
https://www .imf.or g/en/News/Articles/2020/10/30/sp103020-
new-forms-ofdigital-money . ⏎
153. Andrew Stanley , The Ascent of CBDCs, IMF , September 2022,
https://www .imf.or g/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2022/09/Pict
ure-this-The-ascent-of-CBDCs . ⏎
154. IMF, IMF Approach to Central Bank Digital Currency
Capacity Development. Policy Papers 2023(016) (2023),
https://www .elibrary .imf.or g/view/journals/007/2023/016/articl
e-A001-en.xml . Michael Lloyd and Chris Dixon, A Future
Multipolar World, 13(5) Global Policy  818–827 (2022). ⏎
155. Cheng-Y un (CY) Tsang and Ping-Kuei Chen, Global Financial
Order at a Crossroads Do CBDCs Lead to Balkanisation or
Harmonization?, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4636943  p1. ⏎
156. Przemysław Pałka, Data Management Law for the 2020s: The
Lost Origins and the New Needs, 68 Buff. L. Rev . 559 (2020)
P640,
https://digitalcommons.law .buffalo.edu/buf falolawreview/vol6
8/iss2/4 . ⏎
157. Brad W. Setser , The New Geopolitics of Global Finance,
Council on Foreign Relations (2022),
https://www .cfr.org/blog/new-geopolitics-global-finance . ⏎
158. Cheng-Y un (CY) Tsang and Ping-Kuei Chen, Global Financial
Order at a Crossroads Do CBDCs Lead to Balkanisation or
Harmonization?, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4636943  P15–16. ⏎
159. Jiaqi Li, Andrew Usher , and Yu Zhu, Central Bank Digital
Currency and Banking Choices,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4705512 . ⏎
160. Dmitry Oskolkov , The Ef fect of CBDC on Competition
Between Shadow and Commercial Banks,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4708658  p16–17. ⏎
161. Dionysopoulos Lambis/Marra Miriam/Urquhart Andrew ,
Central Bank Digital Currencies: A Critical Review , February
2023. ⏎
162. Zhang Tao, New Forms of Digital Money: Implications for
Monetary and Financial Stability , October 30, 2020. ⏎
163. Hofmann Christian, Which Markets Need Central Bank Digital
Currency?, 18(3) Capital Markets Law Journal  281–302
(2023). ⏎
164. Hofmann Christian, The Impact of a Digital Dollar on
Singapore’ s Society , Banking Sector and Monetary System,
39(3) Banking and Finance Law Review  381–407 (2023). ⏎
165. Roy Davies, Electronic Money , or E-Money , and Digital Cash,
February 1, 2019,
http://projects.exeter .ac.uk/RDavies/arian/emoney .html . ⏎
166. Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC), Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, April 1 1, 2023,
https://www .federalreserve.gov/cbdc-faqs.htm . ⏎
167. A. Kosse and I. Mattei, Making Headway . Results of the 2022
BIS Survey on Central Bank Digital Currencies and Crypto
(2023), https://www .bis.or g/publ/bppdf/bispap136.pdf . ⏎
168. T. W. House, Technical Design Choices for a U.S. CBDC
System (2022), https://www .whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-T echnical-Design-Choices-
US-CBDC-System.pdf  Bank for International Settlements,
Project Tourbillon–Exploring Privacy , Security and Scalability
for CBDCs (2023), https://www .bis.or g/publ/othp80.htm . ⏎
169. B. Brodsky , A. Dubey , and D. Tercero Lucas, Enabling Of fline
Payments in an Online World: A Practical Guide to Of fline
Payment Design (2023),
https://www .lipisadvisors.com/whitepapers . ⏎
170. S. Choi, B. Kim, Y.-S. Kim, and O. Kwon, Central Bank
Digital Currency and Privacy: A Randomized Survey
Experiment (2023), https://www .bis.or g/publ/work1 147.htm . ⏎
171. Panagiotis Michalopoulos, Odunayo Olowookere, Nadia
Pocher , Johannes Sedlmeir , Andreas Veneris, and Poonam
Puri, Compliance Design Options for Of fline CBDCs:
Balancing Privacy and AML/CFT ,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4770513  p1. ⏎
172. Nitin Rane, Role and Challenges of ChatGPT  and Similar
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Finance and Accounting
(2023), http://dx.doi.or g/10.2139/ssrn.4603206  P7. ⏎
173. B. D. Lund and T. Wang, Chatting About ChatGPT : How May
AI and GPT  Impact Academia and Libraries?, 40(3) Library Hi
Tech News  26–29 (2023). ⏎
174. Nitin Rane, Role and Challenges of ChatGPT  and Similar
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Finance and Accounting
(2023), http://dx.doi.or g/10.2139/ssrn.4603206  p. 7. ⏎
175. Nitin Rane, Saurabh Choudhary , and Jayesh Rane, Blockchain
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Integration for Revolutionizing
Security and Transparency in Finance (2023),
http://dx.doi.or g/10.2139/ssrn.4644253  p1. ⏎
176. Nitin Rane, Saurabh Choudhary , and Jayesh Rane, Blockchain
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Integration for Revolutionizing
Security and Transparency in Finance (2023),
http://dx.doi.or g/10.2139/ssrn.4644253  p13. ⏎
177. M. Almada and N. Petit, The EU AI Act: A Medley of Product
Safety and Fundamental Rights? 62(1) Common Market Law
Review  85–120 (2025). OECD, AI Language Models:
Technological, Socio-economic, and Policy Considerations
(DSTI/CDEP/AIGO(2022)1/FINAL) (2023). ⏎
178. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689. EU Of ficial Journal on 12 July
2024. ⏎
179. Art. 9 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR). ⏎
180. Maria Lucia Passador , AI in the Vault: AI Act’s Impact on
Financial Regulation. Bocconi Legal Studies Research Paper
No. 4898828 (Jul. 1, 2024),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4898828 . ⏎
181. See Art. 26(5), Art. 74(6, 1 1, 12, 13), Art. 85, 79, 99. ⏎
182. Marco Almada, The EU AI Act: Logic, Content, and
implications for finance, in Digital Finance in the EU:
Navigating new technological trends and the AI revolution,
Editors Lorenzo Moretti, Laura Rinaldi, and Pierre Schlosser
(European University Institute, 2025), 1 11. ⏎
183. Antonella Sciarrone Alibrandi et al., The European AI Act’s
Impact on Financial Markets: From Governance to Co-
Regulation (Eur . Banking Inst. Working Paper Series, Paper
No. 138, 2023), https://ssrn.com/abstract=4414559 ⏎
184. Maria Lucia Passador , AI in the Vault: AI Act’s Impact on
Financial Regulation (Bocconi Legal Studies Research Paper
No. 4898828, July 1, 2024),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4898828 . ⏎
185. EU AI Act, arts. 18, 19, 72 (describing what documentation
and logs financial institutions are required to keep on the high-
risk AI systems). ⏎
186. Robert Kilian, Linda Jäck, and Dominik Ebel, European AI
Standards—T echnical Standardization and Implementation
Challenges under the EU AI Act (Feb. 26, 2025),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=5155591  P27. ⏎
OceanofPDF .com