2 AI, Crypto Assets, and Financial
Markets
DOI: 10.4324/9781003669357-3
2.1 Introduction
Globalization brings a reduction in the barriers—whether technological or
legislative—to economic exchanges between countries. Moreover,
globalization brings the gradual integration of economies and societies
driven by novel technologies, new economic interaction, and interrelation
among the national and international policies of various players such as
governments, international organizations, business, labor, and civil society.
Hence, globalization increased the cross-border flow of capital, goods,
services, and information.
Both domestic and cross-border M&A deals are susceptible to insider
trading for the reason that acquirers traditionally pay a large premium for
target stocks. Thus, traders who acquire target stocks or call options before
the public announcement of a deal often stand to earn large profits upon the
announcement. Hence, in a cross-border M&A, from the target country
regulators’ standpoint, insiders linked with the foreign acquirer are mostly
residents of foreign jurisdictions, which means that for these foreign
insiders, while their illegal trades take part in the target country’s market,
the crucial evidence required for prosecuting them is in most cases not
under the control of the target country authorities. Thus, an executive in the
acquirer can easily tip a friend regarding the forthcoming cross-border
M&A deal. To that extent, Guo, Lixiong, and Zhang, Sherry1
find that “cross-border deals involving acquirers from
countries with weak legal institutions, more acceptance of
cheating on taxes, and high corruption are associated with

greater intensity of insider trading. This provides further
evidence that some of the trades on the target country’s
financial market are driven by inside information leaked from
foreign acquirers.”
Finance is vital for strong entrepreneurship and, subsequently, constraints
on finance have an impact. Also, finance holds back the opening of markets
along both supply and demand lines through its influence on the growth of
fixed-cost investments such as infrastructure.
The financial markets have enlarged and altered significantly owing to
enhancement in technology and the ever-altering regulatory and social
environment. Moreover, there has been a spread of financial notions,
instruments, and tools because of augmented computing power and
immediate information sharing through networks. Hence, the globalization
of businesses and economies continues to affect the field of finance, and so,
in an AI economy, investors foresee information shifts by adapting their
portfolios to defend against these shifts.
Advances in digitization and information technology have profoundly
altered and transformed the financial industry; as a result, traditional
financial institutions and banks are losing their sovereignty as new market
entrants and emerging technologies replace or substitute their part as
financial intermediaries.
2.2 Digitalization
First of all, digital technologies have spread into economic activity, altering
production patterns via automation and consumption patterns via
increasingly digital platforms. Moreover, the principle of digital technology
is the “binary-digits” setup for storing information and encompassing
processing, storage, and exchange of data. It is worth mentioning here that
the ongoing digitalization is leading to rapid transformations in the whole
structure of the global economy.2 Two driving forces are obvious: firstly,
digital platforms as a dominant business model, and second, an expanding
role for intangible inputs such as data and software. Hence, digitalization
has caused the transformation of the global economy into the digital

economy. Thus, further than the control of the economy by digital
platforms, an augmented function for intangible inputs such as data and
software is a quality of the digital economy which means that by bringing
forth noteworthy scale economies with amplified fixed costs and
diminished marginal costs benefitting large corporations3 are offering a
competitive edge for early technology adopters. On the other hand,
digitalization enhances productivity in the short run by deterring entry by
new companies, leading to lower growth in the long run.4 To that extent, S.
Abis and L. Veldkamp5 find that a considerable transformation in the
production function has taken place, and the adoption of AI and big data
technologies, along with the collection of stocks of data, diverges broadly in
corporations’ manufacturing progress.
It could be said that digital technology allows developing countries to
augment economic growth and thus reduce the difference with developed
countries by enabling them to go beyond physical constraints in
infrastructure, which means boosting integration and stimulating national
competitiveness globally. In line with this, Thuy Linh Cao and Judy Hsu6
argue that “digitalization can even effectively reduce the detrimental effects
of geographic and religion gap on exports. Besides, digitalization is also
seen to help countries overcome language, administration, and economic
gaps to promote export activities.”
Digital technology has let corporations to boost their product and service
reach 
globally, 
capturing 
opportunities 
to 
augment 
operational
effectiveness, including managing productivity and customer relationship
management (CRM).7 Moreover, the integration of AI technologies into
international business practices is indispensable for corporations to remain
competitive, which means that corporations have to adapt to and
acclimatize in the AI global landscape.
Digital transformations change microeconomic allocation via the
electronic functioning of markets and macroeconomic outcomes, generating
alterations in integration and globalization. Moreover, digitalization has
fallout effects on modern economies and societies, such as notable savings
in costs.8 It seems that current digitalization has not been transforming the
central laws of economics but has activated alterations concerning agents’

interaction in the market. To that extent, V. Labhard and J. Lehtimäki9
suggest that
“better institutions and governance tend to be associated with
greater growth-enhancing effects from digital technologies…
while technology has historically had a growth-enhancing
effect, the absence or presence of established and high-quality
societal environment can help in amplifying the potential
growth effects”.
While digital technologies influence sectors in different ways, they generate
productivity gains at the corporate level, with more productive corporations
being more digital.10 To that extent, digitalization generates digital goods
and services.
It has to be taken into consideration that information facilitation and
management have a central role in market running, demanding the
cooperation of public and private sectors. To that extent, Salomé Viljoen11
argues that
“the market machine mechanisms deployed in digital
platforms both vex and challenge these practices, exposing
contradictions between digital markets and the grounding
theories that justify market deference. Yet this contradiction
presents not only a regulatory challenge, but an opportunity to
consider how informationalism beyond managerialism may be
put toward a different regulatory approach and help to realize
a different set of allocative goals and governing institutions”.
Hence, information procedures allow digital platforms to adjust prices to
their benefit, but on the other hand, high-quality public data permit
institutional designs that transfer power toward community control.
It is distinctive that digital technologies are very general, applying all
over the economy and activities. Moreover, digital technologies have
characteristics that make them more authoritative than other technologies,

making them more difficult to fully take advantage of. Additionally, the
significance of most new technologies comes from the fact that they spread
across many different users and uses. Is there an interplay of digital
technologies with institutions and governance? Institutions play a
significant part in forming modern economies, being crucial drivers of
growth.12 Hence, digitalization, institutions, and governance stipulate
openings to economic agents regarding information access, a framework for
market transactions, and by permitting enforcement. In other words,
digitalization by utilizing AI systems allows the SEC to spot and prevent
insider trading.
It is worth mentioning here that even though digitalization is regarded as
a massive game changer that would accelerate corporations’ productivity
and produce value for the economy as a whole, this has not transpired yet.
Robert Anderton et al.13 show that
“digitalisation tends to have on average a positive impact on
firm level productivity growth. However, it does not seem to
be either a massive gamechanger or a “one-size-fits-all”
strategy that manage to deliver productivity gains to all firms
alike. The impact of digitalisation on the average firm’s TFP
growth is relatively small and we find that most firms are not
able to benefit from digitalisation at all…intangible assets are
closely linked with digital technologies and act as a
complement to digitalisation to magnify its positive impact on
the average firm’s TFP growth.”
Hence, the transition to a digital economy has been verified as a precedence
by policymakers and international institutions and so implementing
numerous policies in order to speed up digital adoption and in that way
enhancing productivity.14
It could be said that corporations only in some areas benefit on average
from investing in digital technologies, which means that digitalization is a
game changer only for corporations implementing digital technologies to
become considerably more productive over time. Hence, a higher digital

investment by itself is not turning highly productive “laggards” into frontier
corporations, which means that corporation’s surface at the top of the
productivity distribution is achieved via a more structural innovation
strategy and not directly after an increase in digital investment. Also, it
could be said that policies that incentivize corporations to become more
digital over time should be constructed in a manner assisting “laggard”
companies to fully reap the productivity returns from higher digital
investments on a case-by-case basis, and so corporations must implement
new digital technologies under unique conditions in their daily operations.15
To that extent, investment treaties grant protections and incentives to
foreign investors, allowing them to pursue remedies if they consider these
provisions have been breached.
It has to be taken into consideration that digitalization boosts the
effectiveness of information collection, storage, and exchange, making
possible the collection and processing of information in a fully automated
way. Moreover, digitalization permits storing large amounts of detailed data
and relies on a fully automated data exchange, and so, digitalization
generates economies of scale and network consequences, shaping the
economic basis for the speedy advancement of platforms. Hence,
digitalization produces room for new products and services, such as e-books
or personalized items, thus advancing not only the efficiency of inventory
flows but also tracking and recognizing customers. Thus, digitalization
generates the processing of information in a fully automated manner, such
as analyzing data by AI, permitting a fully automated data exchange
between market participants or members of the value chain, boosting the
evolution of platforms. In addition, personalized advertising augments
consumer choice by lowering advertising costs and permitting new entrants
to market their products without a massive high marketing cost,16 which
means that personalized ad-based monetization permits apps to advance
“high-quality services to consumers for free.”17
It is worth noting that the new players are cloud operators in industries
with a significant digital goods or services component, gaining deep insight
into their cloud users’ needs and business models, creating another channel
for insider trading. On the other hand, AAI digitalization will alter the
whole concept of material life on earth grounded on the rationale of

introducing AAI humanoids consuming a particular kind of energy, which
might alter the global production unless AAI humanoids have the same
feeding demands as humans. This means that the laws of conventional
economics will apply to the AAI economy as well, differentiating only in
the tools of implementation.
It has to be taken into account that the consequences of digitalization on
the manufacturing area, where digital means play a less direct role, vary
considerably from their influence on traditional services or digital products,
which could gain the most from digitalization and thus expose noteworthy
disparities in how digital transformation remodels global trade.18
2.3 Centralization versus Decentralization
Centralization encompasses the central bureaucratic decision-making that
most businesses undertake, and second a centralized ledger records all data,
information, and transactions such as a corporation’s assets, liabilities,
costs, and revenue. From an organizational standpoint, centralization
applies to government structures and at the core of corporations, which
means that users have no control over the single decision-maker running
centralized systems, resulting in possible censorship. The best possible level
of decentralization necessitates balancing the costs of poor decisions owing
to poor information and those arising from goal incongruence which means
that deciding on the optimal level of decentralization implicates a trade-off
between coordination and adaptation.
It is characteristic that the world is becoming centralized and so
gradually is controlled by a few MNEs to the impairment of the many. On
the other hand, decentralization offers more effective management in the
financial sector, greater privacy protection, and fairer interfaces between the
public sector, private sector, and people domain which means putting
humans at the center of decision-making. Also, due to globalization and
access to technologies, more and more interfaces between the public sector,
the private sector, and people have become digitized, and so, digitalization
connects people, businesses, and states empowering access to public goods,
generating digital identity, and improving financial dealings via cyberspace
and AI systems, which means that e-commerce and social media link people

everywhere. In other words, the capability to digitally interconnect and
share information is enabled by cyberspace and AI space.
It is worth noting that cyberspace became centralized in many ways, and
so, cyberspace supposed to be decentralized. In the end the wish of states to
control information led to the centralization of cyberspace.19 Hence,
following the centralization of cyberspace, there is a tendency toward
digitized decentralization of finance and money, which in the end will be
centralized via new technologies and controlled by a few corporations and
governments as well. To that extent, the arrival of Bitcoin and the
“decentralized finance” or DeFi establish a type of decentralization
allowing the exchange of value without the risk of requiring to face up to a
single intermediary. Despite that the Bitcoin system started as decentralized,
it seems that the Bitcoin system has been displaying escalating signs of
control and centralization.
A certain picture of centralization is money. Money, of the fiat kind, like
bank notes and coins, is issued by the central bank of a country in a
centralized manner and backed by and supported by that central bank and
its centralized government. Moreover, in a centralized system, a single
decision-maker or central authority is realized. To that extent, cyberspace
has been centralized at the commercial and organizational level and so,
digital platforms utilizing AI systems have become near monopolies in their
given area of functionality and there has been a concentration of ownership
in the organizers of connectivity rather than providers of specific
functionality. In addition, hardware ownership and management are
centralized by cloud providers along with the utility software embracing
operating systems and databases.
Are governance and decision-making crucial elements in appraising
whether a system is centralized or decentralized? A system with fully
decentralized decision-making implies the absence of any form of
influence, power, or control over developers or contributors. Taking into
consideration that decentralization runs on and within a spectrum, a system
is decentralized for the reason that there is no central decision-maker or
authority; however, a decentralized system can be more or less
decentralized than another system based on the fact that various variables
and factors appear internally and externally within and around a system,

influencing the interaction with any other system on social, political,
technological, and legal matters.
It has to be taken into account that the emergence of cryptocurrencies
and the decentralized finance or DeFi are responses to centralization.
Decentralized finance comprises widespread networks of open source, but
not all systems are decentralized across all dimensions. However, they have
altered the understanding of how digital systems operate, introducing new
methods of authentication that are more automated than those of central
governmental authorities, big banks, giant payment service providers, or
social media corporations. Digital networks require no enrollment at all,
and the databases that they utilize do not sit on that corporation’s servers.
There is a fast-changing and technologically driven world due to the fact
that everything is digitized and is becoming smart through the use of data,
which denotes more and more digital representations of things, like land
titles, currency, commodities, and contracts that are recorded, exchanged,
and stored digitally. Cloud computing is a centralized phenomenon, and
thus, the Cloud is an example of centralization in action. It is characteristic
that decentralized finance has not yet reached its full potential as a result of
several challenges linked to fraud, volatility, usability, and regulatory
uncertainty. Therefore, an AAI system controlling and correcting directly
any deficiencies in the whole process will solve the ineffectiveness of
present decentralized finance models.
It is argued that the capacity to transfer money across borders in a safe
and secure manner is a prerequisite for the global economy. The prospective
advantages of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs) in progressing
financial stability, establishing financial inclusion, and boosting the
competence and resilience of payments have been achieved owing to the
declining use of physical cash, and so, CBDCs are turning out to be a
geopolitically strategic priority and even confronting the supremacy of the
US dollar.20 Financial inclusion is the competence of people and
corporations to have effective access to a wide range of appropriate
financial services. Financial inclusion and access to credit are factors in
accomplishing financial sustainability.
It is stipulated that central banks must reexamine their role as money
issuers21 in the digital age. Thus, central bank digital cash is a way of

upholding financial stability and limiting the mass-privatization of money,
which will generate problems of trust and the quantity of money circulating
in the markets which means inevitably problems of inflation and real
growth.
The responsibility to manage and preserve the value of currency is not
the same as the responsibility to manage and administer transactions, and
the responsibility to supervise payment systems is not the same as the
responsibility to run them. Hence, the management of a transactional
infrastructure supporting CBDC is not antagonistic to the operational
responsibility of a central bank in using CBDCs to produce money and
carry out monetary policy. The European Central Bank sees that CBDC
could be an alternative to euro banknotes and could complement cash by
serving as “an electronic means of payment that anyone could use in the
euro area.”22 IMF regards CBDC as a new kind of money serving as legal
tender. Having a more decentralized governance and running distributed
ledger technologies (DLTs) allow participants to better compete and
innovate and possibly offer better and more added value to end-users and
customers. To that extent, Eddie Yue23 highlights the “need a holistic digital
money framework that will facilitate the healthy co-existence of public and
private money to support our future digital economy.”
As the concept of centralization compares to the concentration of power
and control, decentralized finance or DeFi is a new mode of operating
financial services with the concept of decentralization at its heart. To that
extent, the impetus for DeFi is to remove centralized middlemen, such as
banks, brokers, or exchanges and in doing so DeFi is using blockchain
technology to facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) transfers, borrowing and lending,
along with trading of digital assets.
To that extent, financial technologies have transformed the banking
sector, and there is an escalating competition between banks and emerging
fintech corporations due to the fact that fintech has reformed banking
operations and services. In line with this, innovations offer a platform for
banks to distribute their existing services faster and more competently
because by using AI, banks offer chatbots and virtual assistants, establishing
a direct connection with clients and thus allowing the delivery of multiple
services such as investing in cryptocurrencies or online banking without the

requirement for human intervention. Likewise, fintech technologies allow
non-bank corporations to deliver financial services conventionally offered
only by banks, and so, new competitors will substitute traditional banks
altogether.24 It is characteristic that fintech’s effect is in payments, clearing,
and settlement services, and so, fintech assumes some of the functions that
have conventionally been filled by financial institutions.25
Moreover, DeFi generates and functions as decentralized financial
service offerings and applications on open-source software platforms26 and
so, DeFi protocols wrap a wide selection of financial services, ranging from
lending and asset management activities to decentralized exchange
functionality, and processing derivatives and other financial transactions. In
fact, platform lending has changed the way people engage in lending and
borrowing around the globe. Additionally, online platform lending enhances
the efficiency of financial intermediation, which is not always conceived of
as one of the central functions of banks. Chris Clarke27 argues that
”While platforms are likely to be involved in a degree of
integration with the “installed base” of existing capitalist
sociotechnical devices and social relations, there is also
always the possibility of reimagining their design outside the
narrow financialised outlook promoted by financial inclusion
initiatives.”
Also, DeFi works as a decentralized financial system, entirely without
intermediaries such as financial institutions. On the one hand, in centralized
finance (CeFi), trust is generated by the reputation and guarantees of
intermediaries. On the other hand, in DeFi, trust is produced by the
technical properties of the underlying blockchain technology, such as
cryptographic techniques and consensus algorithms generating transparency
and immutability, not mentioning that DeFi’s absence of intermediaries
enhances working effectiveness and enables wider access to financial
services. Furthermore, DeFi initiates a stable financial system that does not
rely on centralized financial institutions or large banks.
DeFi embraces distributed ledger systems and smart contracts,
presenting an alternative to the existing financial system. Hence, blockchain

technology, in conjunction with smart contracts, offers the technical basis
for DeFi applications. In the traditional CeFi setting, the lender
stereotypically assesses the level of risk of the borrower, involving
extensive know your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML)
verification as the basis for defining the terms and conditions of the loan
agreement. In the DeFi space, the lender cannot appraise the level of risk
since the borrower is naturally anonymous; thus, the lack of risk evaluation
is characteristically made up for by overcollateralization, which means that
this overcollateralization protects against the high volatility of crypto assets.
The blockchain technology underlying the DeFi protocols guarantees
true immutability using cryptographic methods and consensus algorithms;
thus, immutability merges transparency and trustlessness because
manipulations are transparent to all, and the network rejects illegitimate
changes. DeFi gives everyone permissionless access to financial products
and services at any time. From an economic perspective, the central risks
and disadvantages of DeFi related to CeFi correlate with oracle dependency,
the design of stablecoins, high levels of leverage, regulatory uncertainty,
and possibly high barriers to entry for less well-off users participating in
lower-value transactions. Moreover, the risks associated with oracle
dependencies arise from the fact that many DeFi protocols are grounded in
information which is offered by third-party providers. Consequently, DeFi
protocols have to rely on the reliability, accuracy, and correctness of this
information, causing a security threat through malicious oracles that have
an incentive to deliver incorrect information.
It is worth mentioning here that Bitcoin is seen as a speculative
investment instead of an alternative currency or a medium of exchange even
though several MNEs accept Bitcoin payments. It is characteristic that the
problem with cryptocurrencies problem lies in their high volatility as a
result of the inability to place a correct valuation, and so, if products and
services are priced in Bitcoin, corporations will have high price-changing
costs owing to the high volatility of Bitcoin.28 To that extent, due to the
high volatility of cryptocurrencies, stablecoins have been presented to the
market and are anticipated to have stable value as they are pegged to
another asset.29 On the other hand, it is argued that the spillover effects of

Bitcoin bring volatility on stablecoins.30 In line with this, B. Thanh31 et al.
argue that
“the price movement of large-cap stablecoins can be
interpreted as signals on trading opportunities for smaller-cap
stablecoins by investors. Therefore, large-cap stablecoins tend
to drive smaller ones. The findings are expected to show how
larger stablecoin price changes influence the prices of lower
market cap stable coins because stablecoins users can easily
switch between different types of stablecoins in the
cryptocurrency market”.
As mentioned earlier, DeFi creates a new form of financial intermediation,
broadens financial inclusion, and augments operational efficiency stemming
from the qualities of transparency, immutability, and trustlessness linked
with the underlying blockchain technology, and from the character of the
DeFi ecosystem to accelerate composability among highly interoperable
protocols executing financial roles and services, such as lending,
borrowing, and exchanges. Nonetheless, DeFi risks involve scalability
issues of the underlying blockchain technology, privacy concerns owing to
the transparency property of blockchains, and legal and regulatory
reservations, such as the lack of KYC/AML checks.32
2.4 Financial Globalization
It is characteristic that globalization refers to the increasing integration of
national and international financial markets, as well as the increasing
international presence of major banks and other financial intermediaries,
and consolidation refers to the growing size and cross-sectoral scope of
financial institutions. Consolidation and concentration in the financial
services industry have been raised particularly in the origination of
syndicated loans and in derivatives markets. It could be argued that
interactions between the effects of consolidation and the problems arising
from marketization and globalization give further grounds for more

extensive use of public safety net instruments. Recently, the global financial
system has changed deeply, and technological improvements and
deregulation have increased competition in the financial services industry.
Hence, globalization has implications for the generalized injection of
liquidity in the face of financial difficulties, inducing national monetary
authorities to react to international as opposed to solely domestic objectives.
Financial globalization offers measures and inducements for corporate
insiders to better protect the rights of their minority investors.33
Supplementary, investment in corporate governance is less beneficial in
states in which the agency problem of state ruler option is noteworthy for
the reason that many actions that establish corporate insiders decrease the
risk of expropriation by the state.
It has to be taken into account that corporate insiders’ trading conduct
and investment horizon differ because of differences in investment patterns,
liquidity desires, information access, and fears concerning restrictions on
insider trading. Moreover, insiders are subject to some trading incentives
that are not applicable to other groups of investors, such as delegated asset
managers. It is characteristic that the trading conduct of insiders is affected
by the horizon of their compensation contracts and so, many insiders build
up shareholdings through their compensation package. Also, insiders have
reasons to use their privileged access to private information to exploit
trading profits by timing their purchases and sales. To that extent, Ferhat
Akbas34 et al. argue
that “an insider’s investment horizon establishes a benchmark
for expected patterns of continued trading behavior and thus
helps identify unexpected insider trades, which should be
more informative in efficient markets…the trades of short-
horizon insiders are both more unexpected and more
informed, on average, than those of long-horizon insiders”.
The significance of efficient financial markets lies in allowing those who
want to obtain capital from different sources at reasonable rates. Financial
intermediaries activate scarce savings, evaluate research projects, manage
risk by evaluating future cash flow, and facility transactions. Moreover,

financial constraints arising from imperfections in financial markets are a
result of both information asymmetry and the politico-institutional
environment.35
Enterprises globalizing their operations and the associated capital flows
have become key players in the world economy, and cross-border conduct
and capital flows span institutional settings with shifting investor
protections and levels of capital market expansion. Does the rapid
globalization of financial markets take humanity into uncharted territory?
Global finance advances via new digital financial instruments. Is massive
international lending a new phenomenon? The gold standard allowed huge
flows of capital to search the world for the highest return, permitting rapid
growth and fostering international trade, making gold standard look like the
golden age of the international monetary system.36 Capital mobility is today
very high for short-term instruments but not for long-term capital
movements.
It has to be taken into account that international capital mobility has
prevailed in periods of political support either for subordinating monetary
policy to exchange rate stability (as in the gold standard) or for giving up
exchange rate stability so as to enable monetary policy to pursue domestic
objectives (as in the post-Bretton Woods era). Besides, when countries
attempted at the same time to target their exchange rates and use monetary
policy in pursuit of domestic objectives, they had to impose controls to
curtail capital movements. International currency, flexible exchange rates,
and sound institutions are considered benchmarks that defines conditions
under which countries can integrate effectively into the world financial
markets. In contrast, weak currency, fear of floating, and weak institutions
are experiences of developing countries as they integrate into international
financial markets. Financial market interlinkages create extensive
interdependencies in the course of which a shock in one part of the system
can be transmitted to others, exacerbating the contagion of problems from
one economic unit to another.37
The globalization of international trade, in which markets are opened to
flows of foreign goods and services, is necessary. To that extent, financial
globalization has several crucial benefits in emerging market economies by
bringing in new capital, lowering the cost of capital, and promoting

investment, which in turn encourages growth. Hence, when foreign capital
and financial institutions enter a state, they enhance the allocation of
capital. Moreover, financial globalization needs to be widespread enough so
that the entry of foreign capital and foreign institutions boosts competition
in home financial markets. In fact, AI financial globalization is not only a
choice but also a need to be the focus of the next great AI globalization.38
Credit money is the form of money mostly circulated under conditions of
financial globalization, and thus, due to instability of credit money, general
instability has emerged in financial markets globally. Can uncertainty be
regulated? The answer is no; however, ex ante rules will alleviate the
consequences because uncertainty, being the motivating factor not only in
generating profits but also in the character of financial markets, cannot be
removed by regulation from financial markets. To that extent, Chris
Clarke39 argues that “uncertainty in finance might be beyond regulation but
at the same time there is still a societal need to attempt to achieve a politics
of uncertainty that can cope with ignorance of the future through
experimental governmental efforts.” On the other hand, AAI technology run
by AAI humanoids and operating objectively within financial ecosystems
will bring fair growth by correctly utilizing global resources.
Finance is subject to problems like incomplete markets, asymmetric
information, and bubbles, requiring a necessity to prevent financial
instability by controlling financial flows which means that the introduction
of regulations within national boundaries, taking the form of preventing
financial flows that are mainly geared toward speculative activity, is
necessary. In other words, regulations must bring financial stability and
promote governments’ economic and social objectives. The productive
sectors must neither be constrained by the price of finance nor by
inadequate financial flows.
Financial globalization will develop a global institution that can play the
central coordinating role.40 Zekos considers that, in the AI era, IMF should
take on new responsibilities and contribute to the harmonious financial
development in a digital and global world. It is argued that a single currency
will allow the global financial market to develop uniform credit standard
requirements and, in the absence of the latter, this process will cause
periodic financial crises and further intensify the unequal distribution of

income and wealth, which immediately contravenes the true meaning of the
word 
globalization.41 Also, 
financial 
development 
advances 
the
effectiveness of capital allocation and lessens information and transaction
costs, which means higher rates of technological growth, capital formation,
and GDP growth.
To that extent, Zekos considers that the interplay of values among strong
currencies is a dynamic factor for the movement of capital, creating
development opportunities worldwide. Greenspan42 suggests that
“A clear benefit of financial globalization is that, to the extent
that it reduces home bias, savings will be better directed to the
most promising investments in the world, increasing global
economic growth and prosperity. However, so long as risk
aversion exists and trust is enhanced by local familiarity, we
cannot expect that home bias will fully dissipate”.
Moreover, Zekos believes that financial globalization allows for a better
environment where capital will be moved around the world with fewer
barriers, where productivity will bring higher profits. Thus, financial
globalization means growth for developing economies as global savings are
resourcefully directed to capital accumulation in developing countries
where the marginal product of capital is highest. Integration requires
individual countries to have the capability to attract financial capital, which
is independent of external barriers and is determined by the internal state of
the economies of the countries concerned and the future opportunities these
economies can offer.43 Developed and newly formed countries undertake
various measures to prevent financial instability by controlling financial
flows that are purely speculative in nature, ensuring that possible expansion
in aggregate expenditure in the productive aspect of the economy is not
constrained by inadequacies in the financial flow.
It is characteristic that financial globalization has diverse consequences
for bank risk-taking, market power, efficiency, trade, economic growth, and
business models. In fact, banks generate liquidity by transferring liquidity
liabilities to illiquid assets or by offering off-balance sheet activities such as
loan commitments or standby letters of credit. In other words, bank

liquidity making assesses total bank output and shows a strong positive
correlation between bank liquidity and real economic output, which means
that liquidity making plays an imperative part in the economy.44 Also,
currently, AI financial globalization boosts liquidity construction by
bringing additional lending resources to the banking systems of host
countries. Subsequently, financial globalization and bank liquidity have
implications for policymakers when articulating appropriate measures to
deepen financial globalization.
Has AI financial globalization yield equitable benefits for all nations? In
fact, foreign investors encounter informational barriers because of the gap
between home and host countries and so, becoming cautious in taking risks,
which means a reduction in liquidity creation. In line with this, S. M. Aamir
Ali and A. Ghose45 argue that
“Although the concept of globalisation was initially intended
to enhance the agency of developing nations, it has instead
resulted in the erosion of their autonomy to independently
determine their course of action. The democratic process has
been impacted by the loss of decision-making power
experienced by emerging countries as a consequence of
globalisation. The rules governing globalisation were
inequitably formulated to provide preferential treatment to
developed nations. Contrary to prevailing popular opinion, the
impact of globalisation on both developing and affluent
nations has exhibited disparities”.
The widespread deployment of robots and AI-enabled systems in many
fields of economies globally has generated a digitized financial capitalism
encompassing a shrinking workforce. In fact, digital capitalism is a
transformation of the capitalist system of production in which digital
technologies comprise the central production and control device in the
global market which means that capitalism becomes digital when the
production procedure of particular commodities is accomplished by and
through privately owned digital technologies. Thus, digital capitalism

encompasses the processes through which digital technology facilitates the
structural tendencies of capitalism.46 In fact, digital capitalism by
encompassing digital networks is becoming vital part of capital assets
worldwide by embracing metadata collected through cyberspace platforms,
generating the formation of new market types in the exchange of goods,
services, and money. Also, digital capitalism necessitates new work
categories due to the fact that digital technologies serve as labor devices
and infrastructure and so having a key role in certain production methods,
as digital media are today both productive technologies and methods, which
means that digital capitalism generates new managerial approaches because
digital technologies are utilized as managerial means within corporations. It
has to be taken into account that the relationship between digital capitalism
and the digital/AI economy is that digital platforms have a key role in
permitting people to become independent contractors working as
freelancers, while employers choose the individuals that best fit their
requirements.47
2.5 The Market, Banks, and Cash Management
It has to be taken into account that the market has risky assets, traded by
informed investors, noise traders, and competitive market makers.
Moreover, information transmits from the less informed investor to the
more informed investor. Also, market competence advances or market
liquidity degenerates according to the characteristics of the less informed
investors’ information, and so, total trading volume can be higher or
lower.48 To that extent, Itay Goldstein et al.49 argue that
“the well-informed investor never shares in-formation because
doing so only dissipates his informational advantage and
erodes his profit accordingly…an investor with coarse
information optimally chooses to share information with a
well-informed investor, because the former benefits from the
latter trading against the shared information, which therefore
dampens the former’s price impact. By contrast, the well-

informed investor never shares in-formation because doing so
only dissipates his informational advantage and erodes his
profit accordingly”.
It is representative that interactions among investors are influencing trading
strategies and financial market outcomes. Taking into account that sharing
information is costly to investors due to the fact that it diminishes their
informational gain, it is vital to understand the assistance investors get from
sharing information.50
Banks wield deposit market power by investing in capital and, by
holding reserves, circumvent costly liquidity deficiencies but do not entirely
internalize the benefits. Anyway, banks put their positions/titles to hedge
funds as a result of the higher balance sheet costs inflicted on banks by
regulatory alterations, such as the launch of the leverage ratio after the
global financial crisis. It has to be taken into consideration that the central
bank’s selection of deposit subsidies and interest on reserves influences the
cost structure of banks, their price setting, and so the liquidity premium on
deposits. More bank market power necessitates a higher deposit subsidy to
inspire banks to lengthen their balance sheets. To that extent, Dirk Niepelt51
argues that
“unlike in the single-tier system, optimal policy in the two-tier
system with its distortions requires fiscal resources or
regulation to correct them. Dead weight losses of taxation or
regulation therefore add to the social costs of the two-tier, but
not the single-tier, payment system”.
It is well known that banks are fragile, encompassing the likelihood of
individual banks suffering a run, as a result of the provision of liquidity
transformation and ultimately interlocked through fire-sale spillovers.
Moreover, when facing withdrawals, banks liquidate their assets in a
common market, which means that they compel negative fire-sale
externalities on one another. Nonetheless, reducing bank fragility is
welfare-improving for the reason that runs are linked to real resource losses
owing to fire sales, and so, stabilizing the financial sector is an objective for

the regulator which means that regulators have to maintain strong banks
because the fragility of strong banks affects weak banks on the margin but
not vice versa.52
The banking industry is undergoing a digital revolution53 and so FinTech
corporations and BigTech platforms are involved in conventional banking
businesses using their innovative information and automation technologies.
Also, “open banking” empowers borrowers to disclose their customer data
stored in a bank with a fintech that has AI information processing
technology but less access to customer data. Moreover, open banking
enhances the fintech’s screening competence, but, on the other hand, it
diminishes lending competition and harms borrowers if the fintech
corporation is “over-empowered” by the data sharing means.54 Also, banks
with higher IT adoption have larger loan growth due to the fact that an
enhancement of a lender’s IT augments its lending volume.55 Cyberspace
and AI employment exaggerate bank competition, resulting in lower banks’
loan prices.56 Also, companies’ lending by banks with higher IT adoption is
less influenced by the distance between the bank headquarters and their
borrowers. To that extent, Xavier Vives and Zhiqiang Ye57 argue that
“whether the development of information technology intensifies lender
competition depends on its impact on differentiation.”
Reliability of the market is decisive for financial stability. Capital
regulation is a path through which accounting rules influence bank behavior
and financial stability. It is worth mentioning here that some lenders might
be part of criminal organizations that use IML to launder money and
conceal profits from other criminal activities due to the fact that borrowers,
discarded by any legal creditor, invest IML loans encompassing gambling,
drugs, and alcohol. Moreover, the existence of IML is boosted by the
extensive global adoption of interest rate caps limiting access to legal credit
for risky borrowers, which means forwarding claims for illegal lending, and
so, illegal money lending is dominant across the globe.58 To that extent, K.
Leong59 et al. argue that
“the crackdown was highly successful at lowering the payoffs
of lenders and borrowers in the market, as well as lowering
the total volume of loans disbursed. Removing borrowers

from the market, either through offering formal market
alternatives, rehabilitation or education programs, also hurts
lenders, particularly if they focus on medium-performing
borrowers in terms of loan repayment time”.
It is worth noting that high leverage coupled with short-term funding when
exploited to finance risky assets is very instable exposing banks to runs,
which means that banks’ disclosures concerning exposures to risky assets
and funding structures play an imperative part in banks’ stability. On the
one hand, more wide-ranging disclosures offer relevant information
regarding exposures to problematic assets and so diminishing uncertainty.
On the other hand, more disclosures generate bank runs, initiating a panic
among investors. To that extent, Jannis Bischof60 et al. argue that “banks’
disclosures about relevant risk exposures as well as the accounting
recognition of loan losses came late, relative to the evolution of the crisis
and concurrent market expectations. Many banks apparently were reluctant
to communicate and recognize their losses.”
Taking into account that a financial system encompasses interrelated
fragilities, several elements influence financial stability by altering bank
heterogeneity. Hence, regulatory policies limiting the dispersion in bank
asset performances generate a damaging course for stability because when
strong banks are forced to liquidate their assets, the asset market is harmed
as a result of massive liquidations by weak banks.61 To that extent, I.
Goldstein62 et al. argue that “a certain difference between banks’ resistance
to a common set of stress scenarios is desirable…Regulators should take a
holistic approach and combine different regulatory tools to maintain a
certain level of heterogeneity in the financial system.”
It is characteristic that banks create value by lending and cash
management, thus generating broad and persistent economic value.
Moreover, cash management services amplify the value of a corporation’s
reputational capital. It is well known that cash management services move
the supply and demand for products in wholesale and retail markets. On the
other hand, functioning without cash management augments both
counterparty risk and administrative costs by forcing suppliers to transport,
verify, and store cash which, otherwise, financial institutes direct. It has to

be taken into account that problems regarding cash management services
generate a “clientele effect,” permitting them to sell at a price premium,
which means that retail customers assign a lower marginal value to products
sold at “dispensaries” without cash management.63 In line with this, E. A.
Berger and N. Seegert64 argue that “businesses with cash management
charge higher retail prices (8.3%), pay lower wholesale prices (7.3%), and
have higher sales volume (19%). Together, these advantages create a 40%
increase in profitability.”
Furthermore, cash management services, such as safe storage,
verification, and guarantee of funds, delivered by financial institutions yield
substantial economic value for corporations and in case that corporations
lack these services, they have to get alternatives offering internal
warehousing of cash, which incurs costs to transactions and so switching
resources from core trade. On the other hand, without warehousing,
corporations utilizing digital banking, cryptocurrencies, and fintech
solutions bear the costs of developing infrastructure to perform these
functions. In line with this, E. A. Berger and N. Seegert65 argue that “the
benefits of warehousing exist regardless of whether national banks, credit
unions, or fintech provide these warehousing functions.”
It is characteristic that considerable value to investors arises not only
from financial planning concerning portfolio construction but also from
cash flow planning and benefits offered by plan optimization, bringing forth
rewards from upgraded financial well-being. Corporations make
investment, cash savings, cash payments, equity financing, and payout
decisions to maximize their value. In addition, corporations hold more net
financial assets for the reason that equity has become cheaper relative to
debt. Taking into account that only tangible capital is pledgeable and the
increase in intangible capital usage, corporations hold more cash.66
Negative cash flows generate a stronger cash flow volatility impact on cash
restrictions, causing the noticeable drop of corporation’s value. It is worth
noting that cash flow timing patterns offer valuable insights into corporate
fundamentals and corporations’ exposure to aggregate risks, embracing
effects for asset prices67 and real quantities. Nonetheless, financially
constrained corporations exhibit a more noteworthy cash flow timing
pattern. Hence, financially constrained corporations with higher year-end

cash collections gain a higher risk premium. There is a link between
realized macroeconomic variables and asset prices.68 In line with this, W.
He69 et al. argue that “Macroeconomic perceptions generate the cross-
sectional financing, investment, and valuation differences, thus driving the
time variation in these equity market anomalies.”
Financially constrained corporations have high financing requirements,
and so financially constrained corporations with high equity financing
demands collect cash payments70 by year end to circumvent the high
agency cost of year-end unpaid revenue. In line with this, W. Hu71 et al.
argue that “year-end cash collection leads to more risk exposure and higher
stock returns.” It has to be taken into consideration that riskier corporations,
encompassing a higher link between cash flow and the aggregate shock,
have higher financing demands, which means higher optimal savings.
While high cash collection diminishes profitability, higher cash collection
indicates greater information transparency and thus reduces the cost of
accessing the financial market.72 To that extent, W. Hu73 et al. argue that
“Immediate cash payments negatively affect profitability, but
reduce equity financing costs by increasing information
transparency. Financially constrained firms optimally collect
more cash at year-end when firms’ performance attracts more
attention and information transparency is more valuable. Such
behavior further results in greater exposure to aggregate
productivity and financial shocks”.
First of all, subjective prospects influence corporate behaviors such as
investments and external financing, while the evidence of biased corporate
returns and growth prospects shapes corporate-level investment and
external financing. Moreover, positive expectations of aggregate
productivity inspire optimism among both corporate managers and
investors, causing an increase in external financing and investment, a fall in
financing costs, an upsurge in contemporary equity prices, and thus cutting
a subsequent return. It is characteristic that activities of financially
constrained corporations are more influenced by misvaluation shocks or

behavioral biases such as overoptimism. Consequently, with an upward
revision in prospects of aggregate productivity, financially constrained
corporations issue a lot of actually low-quality debt. In the interim,
managers could deliver overpriced equity and debt to utilize investor
optimism, which means subsequent return reversals for financially
constrained corporations. To that extent, W. He74 et al. argue that
“following upward revisions in expectations of
macroeconomic conditions, subsequent equity returns are
relatively low for small, risky, unprofitable, low-quality, and
financially distressed firms. On the other hand, following
downward revisions in expectations of macroeconomic
conditions, these categories of firms earn relatively high
subsequent returns. Thus, revisions in expectations of
macroeconomic conditions induce strong predictable time
variations in anomalies based on these characteristics. In
particular, favorable revisions in expectations of aggregate
productivity predict stronger profitability, quality, and low-
risk anomalies but weaker value, investment, and size
anomalies”.
In fact, financial constraints augment the mispricing instigated by credit
sentiment or extrapolation.75 Also, macroeconomic movements and
monetary policy actions have a greater influence on the contemporary
fundamentals and returns of financially constrained corporations. Moreover,
the investment and debt issuance of corporations with lower credit scores
are vulnerable to credit conditions.
It seems that bank borrowers count on credit lines to manage cash flow
shocks, and lenders charge borrowers for liquidity provision. Moreover,
corporations functioning with old capital are riskier for the reason that
costly technology adoption hampers their flexibility in progressing to the
latest technology, making them more subject to technology frontier shocks.
Also, corporations embrace the latest capital or keep running with the
existing mode, which is turning out to be outdated and less valuable over

time, meaning that by undertaking the latest technology, a more competent
capital is instated.76 It has to be taken into account that gross investment is
larger when the corporation’s capital is inadequate, given that current
capital cannot be utilized for the operation of the new technology.
Furthermore, 
expensive 
new 
technology 
implementation 
hampers
corporations’ flexibility in updating their capital stock concerning
technology, furthering the risk dispersion between technology-adopting
corporations and non-adopting ones.
Corporations use cash management to foster reputational capital,
permitting them to demand better terms in the wholesale market and
advancing quality guarantees to consumers in the retail market. The Total
Cash Management System lets MNE to produce positive cash flow,
ensuring its operational use to cause future cash flows which means that the
application of Total Cash Management supplies a platform for both present
and long-term objectives in the international financial management of
MNEs, and so a MNE has a prospective to get financial resources owing to
the geography of its undertakings. Hence, MNEs have easy access to the
devices of both local and global financial markets, and so MNEs have to
choose the most effective financial resources and their sustainable
management. To that extent, crypto assets provide a new way of financing
MNEs.
MNEs have a high credit rating, allowing them to access cheaper
resources and the availability of liquid assets and intensive cash flow let
MNEs to diminish the cost of obtained capital, real sales evolution, and an
upsurge of investment attractiveness, which means offering financial
stability and opportunities for obtaining capital. Moreover, MNEs are
amalgamated into the global financial system, and their finances are its
structural elements, allowing leading global banks to offer conditions for
the transparency of their activities and thus escalating the opportunities to
obtain debt funds from credit organizations. Corporations and MNEs try to
raise financing when banks cut lending.77 On the other hand, there are
shortcomings for MNEs due to currency, transaction, political, and
economic risks affecting the decision regarding the selection of financial
resources.78

2.6 Venture Capital and AI
VCs have a decisive role in the economy as a result of their uneven
contribution to corporate R&D and innovation. Moreover, VCs offer
liquidity to founders, tempting them to become entrepreneurs.79 In line with
this, Michael Ewens80 et al. argue that
“while a post-product increase in cash compensation makes
founding a startup more attractive than a contract that pays a
flat salary, low pre-product compensation can still leave high
earning potential founders holding substantial non-
diversifiable risk…variation in the expected time to product
development is a key driver of the relative attractiveness of
entrepreneurship across sectors for potential founders with
attractive options outside of entrepreneurship and in sufficient
personal wealth to finance consumption while waiting for a
product to materialize”.
It is worth mentioning here that AI utilization across businesses is on the
uptick; however, there is some concern regarding the use of AI, involving
algorithmic aversion and fear of machine bias.81 Taking into account that an
algorithm is as good as the data it works with, AI can identify and correct
human bias, and multiple devices exist that identify and adjust for such.82
VC evolved to fund promising startups that otherwise lacked the
established presence required to safeguard business loans in exchange for
an equity position. Regardless of the advances in AI and VC’s focus on tech
startups, VC corporations themselves have failed to employ data analytics
and machine learning in their own decision-making, relying instead on
copying the investments of other corporations. The use of AI by VC
corporations advances investment outcomes.83 Moreover, VC has shifted
away from that of an advisor offering governance and oversight to startups,
to that of a speculative hands-off financier. Even though originally VCs
played active management roles in delivering both oversight and corporate
governance, such is no longer the case, and so VC corporations are less

involved in developing and growing emergent businesses, capitulating to
the impulses of their founders whose business strategies are grounded in
undermining the competition to dominate the market.84 To that extent, VC
corporations merely copy the investments made by other corporations. Also,
while the absence of due diligence results in unsuccessful investment
decisions, the use of AI in investment decision-making offers better
investment results.
Furthermore, AI can alter the entire VC landscape by opening the door
for a greater number of successful startup openings, while concurrently
expanding corporation investments which means that by integrating AI into
the decision-making process, corporations can mitigate the influence of
human bias and deliver more accurate decisions than those delivered by
human experts. Thus, corporations that exploit objective, data-driven
approaches to investment platforms will outperform those that do not, and
so incorporating data analytics into VC investment decision-making will
augment profit opportunities and expand portfolio diversification.
It is worth mentioning here that specialization leads to lower risk in
cross-border investments from a venture capitalist’s point of view, which
means that with escalating deal-specificity, the support and value
improvement of a foreign portfolio corporation are guaranteed in
international markets as a result of the investor’s specialization. Moreover,
as venture capital corporations invest in new businesses functioning in
ambitious markets, these investments are typified by high levels of
asymmetric information and uncertainty. In line, investors encounter
institutional, geographical, cultural, and legal distance from their own
countries, which means that this inaccessibility rises higher information
asymmetries, investment risk, and costs for the investor if the target
business is located abroad, and so the investor allocates more resources to
supervising and managing the business abroad.85 Concerning venture
capital, A. Nörthemann86 argues that
“the likelihood of a cross-border deal increases with higher
levels of industry specialization. Furthermore, this effect is
moderated by determinants at the institutional and portfolio
company levels, reflecting the degree of information

asymmetry between the venture capital firm and the portfolio
company.”
A crucial factor in the appeal of venture capital (VC)-financed
entrepreneurship for high-earning prospective founders is the anticipated
time to create a startup’s initial product for the reason that founder-CEOs’
cash compensation rises significantly after product development, thus
lessening the non-diversifiable risk that founders encounter at startup birth.
Consequently, a startup’s projected time to develop its first product is a
crucial basis for the appeal of VC-sponsored entrepreneurship. To that
extent, Michael Ewens87 et al. argue that
“the increases in CEOs’ cash compensation after a startup
begins product development are large enough that non-
diversifiable risk held by founder-CEOs falls substantially
after achieving this milestone…a startup’s expected time to
developing its first product is a key determinant of the
attractiveness of VC-backed entrepreneurship”.
Hence, increases in CEOs’ cash compensation after a startup begins product
development are large enough that non-diversifiable risk held by founder-
CEOs falls substantially after achieving the product development
breakthrough.
On the one hand, Felix von Meyerinck88 et al. argue that
“directors’ involvement in forced CEO turnovers can be
expected to be assessed by the market and to affect directors’
reputation…Directors interlocked to a forced turnover
experience an economically large…directors are not penalized
for involvement in a CEO turnover per se but for forced CEO
turnovers that are related to governance failures by the board”.
On the other hand, sacking a CEO is seen as an indication of malfunction in
the supervising and is harmful to a director’s status.

It has to be taken into consideration that conditional risk not only
clarifies profitability and investment, but also supervising conditional risk is
imperative for judging the economic significance of variances, appreciating
market competence, and assessing the performance of asset managers. N.J.
Gormsen and C.S. Jensen89 argue that “Overall, the impact of conditional
market risk on anomaly alphas is larger than the impact of unconditional
market risk, suggesting that researchers and practitioners should seriously
consider controlling for conditional risk whenever implementing the CAPM
in the future.”
It is characteristic that venture capitalists with high social status in the
national market invest abroad due to augmented national experience.
Moreover, the positive development of a portfolio corporation is expected
when the investor is accustomed to business patterns in the particular
industry of investment. Additionally, industry-specific knowledge is vital in
ascertaining good investment opportunities and adding value to
corporations.
Also, corporation-level factors such as industry specialization or ties to a
foreign country90 play a part in investment decisions. Antonia
Nörthemann91 argues that
“the probability of investing abroad increases with higher
degrees of industry specialization even though international
deals are often associated with higher risk. This relationship
illustrates how the liability of foreignness has a varying
influence on an investor’s investment decision depending on
the investor’s specialization in the specific industry to which
the deal is assigned.”
It is worth mentioning here that venture capitalists do not seek long-term
progressive growth of the business where they invested, since this would
not let an acceptable return on all the capital invested, which means that
they demand well-timed and substantive results.92 It is worth noting here
that the active portfolio optimization allows investors to gain access to
stocks, bonds, and private equity (PE) funds, and so ex ante commitment

has large consequences for investors’ portfolios and welfare.93 To that
extent, Elise Gourier94 et al. argue that
“investors want to change their capital allocations when
capital is called—most often to increase the allocation. Hence,
investors are under allocated to PE and willing to pay a large
premium to adjust the quantity committed upon capital call. A
direct implication of PE under allocation is that the demand
for changing the amount committed is asymmetric. Investors
would rarely want to reduce their allocation to PE, but highly
value the option to top-up their allocation when capital is
called”.
Furthermore, venture capital and private equity have achieved importance
in the market, and so venture funding for R&D has stimulated the
establishment of several startups. To that extent, Shaun Wang95 indicates
that an augmented level of R&D input improves the corporation’s value
growth.
Financial liberalization is one of the most important aspects of
globalization involving both short-term capital flows and FDI. Moreover,
financial globalization is illustrated by the fact that trading in the global
foreign exchange market has far outpaced the growth in international trade
in goods and services. Additionally, foreign exchange is increasingly being
treated as an asset or a commodity, not just as a means of payment, with a
parallel increase in the use of derivatives in foreign exchange markets.
Changes in global conditions, such as the decline in nominal interest rates,
gave a spur to capital flows to emerging markets. Moreover, international
trade is changing because of the introduction of new technologies,
innovations, and geopolitical modifications, which means they are opening
up new prospects for international business and trade expansion.96 Taking
into account that performance-targeting incentives upset corporate policies,
competitive forces stabilize the strain to meet performance targets via
alterations in other corporate policies, such as investments in capital and
innovation.97

2.7 AI and Financial Markets
Markets are powerful institutions run by law encompassing public and
private regimes fashioning entitlements, enforcing market exchanges, and
restricting expropriation, which means that distinctive types of markets
exemplify fluctuating normative concepts of the market. To that extent,
Hanoch Dagan98 et al. argue that “appreciating the significance of law as
the infrastructure of markets reveals that no particular market structure is
inevitable. Instead, every market order is the result of a complex set of legal
and political choices.” On the one hand, markets are the invention of human
societies, and the form of any market is grounded in the legal rules guiding
actors’ behavior in the market. On the other hand, beyond the law, markets
function according to economic principles articulating their running. In
other words, while markets are in part legal constructs shaping their
construction, competent markets are invented so as to maximize economic
output. To that extent, an AAI technology will be able to illustrate the
interplay between legal and economic principles in valuing the role of the
market at any moment in order to make the right predictions.
The appearance of international digital trading settings has made it
possible for corporations to globalize operations on different trading
platforms. Long-term financial planning takes a considerable amount of
time in every corporation. The financial market has emerged as a place
where debt, cash, and financial assets are exchanged; thus, the financial
market is a system encompassing a set of financial transactions that are
traded and embraces all organizations that act as financial intermediaries,
directly or indirectly. Moreover, financial markets are incorporating a
procedure under which financial assets are traded professionally, cost-
effectively transferring financial resources from surplus sectors to sectors
with medium and long-term financial deficits, manifesting several benefits
for borrowers and investors. Also, financial markets handle securities, other
than the monetary market, and informatics allow dealing from outside the
market through brokerage firms spread across different states owing to the
globalization of financial activity and the merger of capital markets.
Additionally, financial markets deal with the management of funds as a key
function in economic growth, having an impact on individual wealth,
companies, consumers, and on economic flows.

Has AI caused financial market disruption? It is characteristic that the
running of the financial markets is interconnected with business activities
since one of the roles of banks and financial institutions is to offer access to
the capital required by corporations and individuals. Consequently,
financial markets are under the influencing powers of digitalization and
“globalization.” Also, corporations are seeking financing outside the
banking sector, while the transformation of the business environment in
financial markets is ongoing. It is worth noting that the financial market
disorder is associated with the aftereffects of digital disruption for
businesses and individuals, resulting in the direct and indirect spread of
digital disruption to finance as a role and industry. To that extent, the arrival
of electronic platforms has empowered numerous new activities such as the
financing of corporations.99 Which is the role of AI in financial markets? AI
will offer the data and predictions about the development and functioning of
financial markets, allowing an objective approach, spotting any instances of
corruption, and preventing crimes such as insider trading and money
laundering.
It has to be taken into account that financial markets activate financial
resources, directing them toward investment with the purpose of motivating
financial operations and advancing their prospective returns. Revolutions in
capital market technology have transpired at the level of the technologies
and financial instruments available in the financial market, which have
globalized in a manner that boosts the flow of capital and the global capital
market integration. Also, financial markets’ effective and resourceful
character is grounded in their capability to enlarge the size of the market by
reinforcing their institutional and regulatory structure in order to exploit the
benefits and drop the risks of financial liberalization, predominantly capital
account liberalization and the integration of global financial markets.
As mentioned earlier, digitization is the process of transforming
information from analogue to digital format, such as paper letters to email
communications, or paper receipts to digital receipts, and so corporations
keep better control of business activity and the capability of starting some
basic automation. Moreover, startups emphasize the point that technology
entails a solid business model or a disruptive transformation so as to
engross all the prospective automation effectiveness and growth capabilities

leading to digitalization, where corporations align and digitally transform
their business model. Hence, digitalization is altering people’s ways of
searching for and buying products and services due to the fact that digital
platforms100 are fundamentally transforming the people’s interaction. Also,
digitalization offers businesses new modes to grow, reach prospective
customers, and expand into new markets globally. The use of Chatbots,
WhatsApp, Instagram, and other digital platforms has become common in
B2B101 relationships, and so there is a move in customer behavior, a
transformation in technology, and an alteration in the market. Hence,
corporations must keep up and learn about their customers’ emerging
habits. To this extent, the digital platforms have started a global rivalry,
which means that if one firm fails to meet expectations, the customer finds
other routes.
It is characteristic that corporations optimize their current business
models in order to build up new products, services, and so achieving
efficiency and flexibility. It has to be seen that optimizing short-term
profitability does not automatically guarantee optimum shareholder returns
in the long run. Consequently, data analytics, cognitive systems, AI, data-
based business models, and platforms are used to stimulate growth.
It has to be taken into account that in order to be valuable, financial
control systems have to mirror a corporation’s strategies and objectives.
Management control systems should encourage managers and other
employees to use maximum effort through a sort of monetary and
nonmonetary rewards.
2.8 Metaverse and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs)
It has to be taken into account that the integration of AI with VR and AR
technologies is amplifying their collective effects within the metaverse by
facilitating the formation of hyper-realistic simulations, the development of
AI entities along with the enablement of deeper, more expressively
involving interactions between users and AI entities.
Additionally, it has to be taken into consideration that digital entities are
reforming the conception of identity, escalating it beyond physical
individuals due to the fact that AI entities are simulating human behavior,

presenting diverging levels of interaction, autonomy, and behavioral
complexity within the metaverse, which means that AI humanoids can
appear as virtual assistants, companions, or social media influencers102
interacting with people and organizations and guiding human behavior.
It is characteristic that the emergence of the Metaverse and NFTs has
initiated substantial alterations in ownership and participation in virtual
economies online. The Metaverse is a shared online space that combines
elements of the physical world, digital spaces, and cyberspace in generating
a unified, interactive environment. The metaverse reshapes digital and
physical lives. It could be said that virtual reality, augmented reality,
blockchain, and AI are central technologies in creating engaging
experiences and making sure new content is both safe and dynamic.
It is worth noting here that “Metaverse Identity”103 incorporates personal
characteristics and economic essentials in demonstrating a new frontier in
inspiring self-expression by enclosing technological advancements,
clarifying an energetic interplay between innovation and identity
formation.104 It has to be taken into account that the perception of digital
identities and management within the metaverse allowing interoperability is
the basis of an interconnected metaverse105 system. Hence, the
standardization of metaverse identities allows the advancement of the
metaverse ecosystem. Thus, the absence of standardization and trust across
platforms diminishes users’ ability to keep social value across multiple
platforms.
NFTs are unique digital assets. The rise of NFTs has provided creators,
including artists, musicians, and digital designers who create the original
content that becomes tokenized as NFTs, with new ways to monetize their
work, permitting them to claim ownership and receive compensation in
manners that were not formerly conceivable. NFTs, cryptocurrencies, and
Web3 technologies are producing new paradigms for money, possessions,
and markets.106
Due to the metaverse’s qualities, there is a need for robust mechanisms
to protect user data, guaranteeing safe interactions in digital environments.
The underlying technology of NFTs is assembled on blockchain, a
distributed ledger that documents transactions across a network of
computers, safeguarding data integrity and security. NFTs’ transformative

prospective in digital ownership and asset management within and beyond
the metaverse necessitates a move toward more intelligent, responsive
virtual environments. The Spatial Web merges the physical world with
virtual spaces, making the web more multidimensional.107
Furthermore, NFTs assign distinctive identifiers and metadata to digital
assets and so making certain their indivisibility and distinctiveness, which
means that NFTs brought a transferal in the monetization of digital content,
empowering creators to energetically assert intellectual property rights.
Hence, via the utilization of smart contracts, NFTs not only enable direct
monetization but also allow the buildup of royalties from secondary market
transactions and so advancing economic empowerment among creators
within both digital and virtual economies. Thus, NFTs augment the liquidity
and utility of virtual goods, playing an influential role in the proliferation of
DeFi and accelerating the convergence of virtual and real-world economies.
The liquidity challenges arise due to an unplanned need for cash or
securities and so capital regulations oblige banks to have liquidity buffers,
which contain buffers for intraday liquidity. Managing liquidity is an
existential activity for financial institutions, and iquidity management is
muddled by “legacy” payment arrangements and financial market
infrastructures.108
NFTs leveraged blockchain technology to offer a solution to the digital
replication challenge, enabling the creation of unique, verifiable digital
assets. The extension of NFTs to virtual real estate reflects a broader
application of this technology, illustrating its capacity to facilitate
ownership in entirely digital environments, notably within virtual worlds or
the metaverse. Virtual real estate transactions via NFTs underline the
economic prospects of virtual spaces, offering opportunities for investment,
development, and commerce similar to physical real estate but within
digital landscapes. Taking into account that AAI humanoids might be able
to live in both conventional and digital landscape and so giving another
dimension to the role of fiat and digital currencies due to the different
demands of the two different dimensions of economic and material life of
the inhabitants of both environments.
It has to be taken into account that digital platforms present the technical
infrastructure needed for issuing NFTs, which means offering means that

convert digital content into blockchain-based assets with verifiable
ownership. Therefore, digital platforms offer the space to act between
creators and the broader market, which means managing effectively digital
assets. Interoperability and standards are central to the functionality and
prevalent adoption of NFTs across several blockchain environments, and so
allowing NFTs to be effortlessly traded, viewed, and used beyond the
confines of their original platforms. Moreover, interoperability lets NFTs
formed on one blockchain to interact with applications and users on
another.
It is worth noting here that the decentralized quality of blockchain,109
while advancing advantages in transparency and security, also confuses the
control and protection of personal information. Hence, although blockchain
technology offers a level of security through its immutable ledger, the
interfaces and platforms users interact with denote features of vulnerability,
which means that possible phishing attacks, smart contract exploits, and
other forms of cyber threats present real risks to NFT owners. Furthermore,
due to that fact that NFTs run on blockchain technology necessitating
substantial computational power, the energy consumption linked with
producing and trading NFTs has caused concerns regarding their
sustainability.
It has to be taken into account that the development of virtual worlds110
is producing a new virtual economy encompassing many different virtual
assets of core value. At the same time, the composability of NFTs111 with
DeFi is generating new investment prospects in an open financial system.
Also, the decentralized character of NFTs and the absence of a standardized
technique to assess their valuations are generating exploitation
opportunities for AML, and thus NFTs could be leveraged by illicit players
in concealing the real value of financial transactions or other business
activities. Therefore, unregulated NFTs can be utilized to implement
financial crimes such as money laundering and for conducting other
unlawful activities.112 In banking, the use of AI in AML and fraud detection
has altered financial crime inspections, leading to more targeted
identification of financial crimes.
Taking into account that NFTs are unique goods conveying information
about the source in commercial trade, Andrea Mccollum113 argues that

“NFT tokens could be considered mere ‘ownership receipts’ for creative
works rather than digital goods that are sold using association with a
brand.” Moreover, NFTs are digital tokens that are stored using blockchain
technology and contain metadata tying the token to a specific asset. Hence,
NFTs offer the purchaser a digital link to a linked asset stored using
blockchain technology. Thus, the transfer of assets using NFTs serves as a
device for monetizing all types of digital content. In line, Andrea
Mccollum114 argues that “NFTs and other blockchain-based assets will
likely impact many areas of daily life in the future. Brand owners should be
afforded the same protection in these spaces that they enjoy for tangible
goods produced in the real world.”
It is characteristic that blockchain technologies and cryptocurrency will
not be treated differently from other types of commercial products under
trademark law, and sales of NFTs amount to engaging in commerce.115 It is
argued that trademarks linked with physical items offer protection for
digital reproductions of those items, which means that the MetaBirkin NFTs
“could constitute a form of artistic expression,” and selling the images did
not make them simple commodities rather than expressive works116 and so,
the court held that the “title ‘MetaBirkins’ should be understood to refer to
both the NFT and the digital image with which it is associated.”117
2.9 Security and Tokens
DLT and the blockchain empower the digitization of any asset class as
tokens and are shaping the manner toward future of financial markets.
Security token offerings (STOs) are advancing funding, where digital
tokens are issued as regulated investment products on the blockchain. Once
the token offering has taken place, the tokens are traded on the secondary
market. Does the uncontrolled offering of digital money without any
examination of its value generate over-offering of money leading to
devaluation?
Security tokens118 denote shares of ownership in corporate equity, fixed
income, investment funds, commodities, or less liquid asset classes such as
real estate or fine art, comprising a new form of venture financing having

several advantages because corporations easily reach a large investor base
while dropping transaction costs.
First of all, transparency concerning the transactions is accomplished
through the blockchain, and the interoperability of the blockchain solves the
problem of lack of compatibility between different systems or databases,
allowing self-custody of any tokenized asset on one platform.119 Another
major advantage of STOs is the prospective liquidity offered through the
likelihood to transfer and trade tokens on secondary markets, which means
that security tokens merge the advantages of the underlying technology with
the legal protection of conventional securities.
Security token offerings are a method for corporations to increase capital
where they issue digital tokens as regulated investment products on the
blockchain. By transferring a digital token, the participants transfer the
ownership or other property rights over the asset represented by the token
without the intervention of traditional intermediaries. J. Kreppmeier and R.
Laschinger120 argue that
“companies that intend to raise funding via STOs would be
well advised to offer a pre-sale phase in their STO and assure
their intentions to trade the tokens on the secondary market
while already devising a plan for successful future trading.
From an investor’s perspective, these signals can be
interpreted as positive quality signals on the basis of which
appropriate investment decisions are conducted”.
STOs allow investment in securities recorded on a blockchain. In line,
Thomas Lambert et al.121 argue that “entrepreneurs should carefully design
their security tokens and run their offering professionally because doing so
may not just help them raise more capital, but it may also foster general
awareness of the benefits of a well-developed STO market.”
2.10 Crypto Assets

A crypto asset is a digital asset that functions through the digitalized
distributed ledger or the blockchain. Crypto assets have appeared as a key
movement in digital transformation and, by utilizing new technologies, are
distinguished as one method of advancing financial operations. Moreover,
crypto assets are being integrated into financial services applications to
make possible near real-time transactions, accurate data recording, and
more efficient payment processes. Hence, crypto assets create efficiency
advantages in the financial sector by transforming the performance of
financial markets to enable the exchange of value without the necessity for
a central authority or intermediary, which means that crypto assets generate
openings for the financial sector.
It could be said that crypto-assets markets are fast advancing and
reaching a point where they will epitomize a threat to global financial
stability as a result of their scale, structural vulnerabilities, and augmenting
interconnectedness with the conventional financial system. Also, the swift
evolution and global quality of these markets create the prospect for
regulatory gaps, fragmentation, or arbitrage.
The emergence of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies has generated an
anonymous alternative financial system, which means that criminal
networks now have new openings to circumvent detection and seizure of
funds. Nonetheless, crypto is hardly ever used as a medium of exchange to
purchase goods and services and so is normally converted from and back to
fiat currencies, such as US dollars, which means that the entry and exit
points into the crypto ecosystem are crypto exchanges adhering to
international laws designed to mitigate illicit financial flows. Also, while
cryptocurrencies are aimed to be anonymous, the environment in which the
transactions clear on the blockchain presents a ledger that tracks the
movement of funds; thus, blockchain transactions are quasi-anonymous
which means that, via algorithms, it is clarified where funds enter, move
through, are exchanged into different cryptocurrencies, and exit the crypto
ecosystem.122 Thus, cryptocurrencies are another cost-effective network for
moving illicit funds across borders. To that extent, John M. Griffin and
Kevin Mei123 indicate that “the network of scammer nodes is highly
connected, likely indicating that there exist widely-used services that funnel
funds for extremely large and possibly related criminal networks.” It seems

that clustering AAI algorithms can be used to detect Bitcoin transactions for
moving funds across sovereignties.
It has to be taken into account that while public equities trade on
established secondary markets like the NYSE or NASDAQ, crypto assets
trade on hundreds of upstart markets.124 Moreover, crypto networks and
tokens are devised by developers and then, by using blockchain technology
and often smart contracts, conceived to run autonomously after setup. It
also has to be taken into consideration that cryptocurrency investors rely on
networks and media for evaluating new information regarding AI and AI
tokens, leading to unusual price outcomes. ChatGPT is utilized in the crypto
assets market for predictions, and so, AI tokens revealed higher returns
linked to non-AI tokens around the launch of ChatGPT.125 To that extent,
Ante, L. and Demir, E.126 specify that
“crypto asset markets are highly fragmented. While there was
virtually no relevant attention for AI tokens before the launch
of ChatGPT…investors should closely follow the
developments related to specific themed tokens as their
dynamics can be different from the rest of the cryptocurrency
market.”
In line with this, Jang Ho Kim127 argues that “asset class recommendations
by ChatGPT improves portfolio efficiency compared to more diversified
portfolios…Interestingly, the three indicators chosen in our analysis are
market indicators that are also published with daily frequency (e.g.,
breakeven inflation rate measures daily expectations).”
In the EU, the Crypto‐Assets Regulation (MiCA) aims to restrict the
issuance of stablecoins to banks and so‐called e‐money institutions.
Moreover, the Regulation of Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA128)
strengthening cybersecurity, and Regulation (EU) 2022/858, which
regulates distributed ledger technology,129 accelerate digital innovation in
the interest of consumers and market efficiency. Only public authorities’ ex
ante review, coordinated by ESMA, affirms a harmonized application of
MiCA. Also, MiCA identifies its scope by referring generically to tokens

that are not yet regulated by existing EU financial legislation. To that
extent, D.A. Zetzsche et al.130 argue that “all crypto-assets could be
deemed, at first and prior to any involvement of supervisory authorities,
‘transferable securities’ unless (and until) they are exempted and requalified
by NCAs applying the classification criteria promulgated by the (Joint)
ESAs under MiCA.”
It has to be taken into account that the “cryptoization” of finance refers
to when crypto “assets are substituted for domestic currency and assets, and
circumvent exchange and capital control restrictions,” demanding global
regulation due to its digital nature.131 To that extent, Gordon Y. Liao132 et
al. argue “that payment stablecoins are proportionally less employed for
trading and leveraged speculation activities than the fiat counterparts.”
Moreover, crypto tokens have been judicially regarded as a form of
property.133
It is underlined that decentralized financial technologies could be used to
circumvent regulation via anonymization, while raising fears concerning
regulatory enforcement and increasing jurisdictional uncertainty because of
these technologies’ operations regardless of borders.134 It is worth noting
that decentralized financial services expand financial inclusion, enable open
access, and generate new openings for financiers and innovators, and so,
decentralized networks cut transaction costs and produce network effects
without encountering monopoly costs. In other words, once a decentralized
peer-to-peer network tries to dominate, it cannot accumulate enough
monopoly power to monopolize the network and prohibit others from
participating, letting everybody to gain from the network consequences and
so broadening transaction opportunities.135 Moreover, decentralized finance
generates a trust-minimized and automated version of traditional financial
infrastructure.
It has to be taken into consideration that data “propertization” empowers
data corporations to enforce monopoly power across the market by
increasing barriers for prospective market entrants.136 Monopoly power
causes discriminatory trades in data collection markets as a result of
information asymmetries and bargaining power disparities. To that extent,
Z. Chadambuka137 argues that

“Data ownership would raise what is already a high cost to
democratic politics from data. Applied to data, private
property would make a sharp switch from providing for
political liberty through ensuring decentralization of power
and head off down the path to supporting centralized political
control in the data-powered internet age. It would also move
the dial backwards, taking society out of contract and back to
status…law should provide protection against dangers from
not just data collection, but also data processing, trading, and
use”.
Digital platforms that run on blockchain technologies offering products and
services use their own digital currency to settle transactions and rely on
decentralized governance. It has to be taken into consideration that the FTX
failure was a classic liquidity crisis that turned into a solvency crisis, like
that of Lehmann Brothers in 2008, and so, the crashes of Babel Finance,
Celsius Network, BlockFi, and Genesis were more of crypto lending
corporations. Moreover, each collapse demonstrates the same pattern of
noteworthy interconnected centralized crypto intermediaries becoming
unstable as a result of mismanagement, malfeasance, fraud, theft, and a
general lack of transparency.138 To that extent, Douglas W. Arner et al.139
argue that
“while crypto was presented to the world as a new type of
finance avoiding the risks associated with traditional finance,
in practice, agency, operational and financial risks have
evolved across the ecosystem and crypto has proven not to be
immune from traditional risks of finance”.
Also, T. Yuyama et al.140 specify that
“although the stock market is correlated with the crypto
market, the correlation is negatively affected by crypto-

specific risks. Therefore, the contagion effects of a crypto
meltdown on the traditional market are not yet apparent and
limited. In fact, we find: extreme volatility in the stock market
can cause extreme volatility in cryptos, but not the other way
around. The finding is consistent with the case of FTX’s
collapse…stock-specific risks spill over to crypto-assets, and
consequently increasing the linkage between both markets,
while the crypto-specific risks have limited spillover effects at
the current stage, and are contributing toward a lower linkage
between both markets. Risk spillover is likely to be one-sided
and limited from crypto-assets up to this point. However, this
may be because traditional financial institutions have little
crypto-asset exposure”.
Thus, if transactions between the crypto-assets industry and the traditional
financial sector increase in number and size in the future, the connectedness
through crypto-assets holdings may lead to risk spillover. To that extent, the
risk in the crypto ecosystem on financial stability depends critically on how
interconnected it is with the traditional financial sector. Likewise, Azar,
Pablo D, et al.141 argue that
“financial stability risks are not extensive because the digital
asset ecosystem does not provide significant financial services
and its interconnections with the traditional financial system
are limited. At present, the potential spillovers from runs on
stablecoins that are backed by money market instruments
represent the most salient financial stability risk.”
It is characteristic that crypto assets growth has been accompanied by major
volatility, with most crypto coins going through several cycles of rapid
growth followed by spectacular collapses. Hence, crypto asset markets act
both as a source of shocks and as amplifiers of overall market volatility;
thus, they have implications for financial stability because crypto assets

incorporate technological attributes and features, serving as means of
payment by decentralizing finance,142 to store value, asset transfer, privacy,
digital identity, and governance.143 To that extent, Roshan Iyer and Adina
Popescu144 indicate that
“the interconnections between crypto assets and financial
assets are lower compared to within their respective asset
classes, in terms of both sending and receiving returns and
volatility spillovers. Furthermore, we show that crypto assets
primarily transmit spillovers to financial markets, although
during periods of financial sector stress, the reverse may also
occur.”
Some market participants see existing stablecoins as substitutes for fiat
currency in the crypto-asset ecosystem, but they are not widely used outside
crypto-asset markets.145 Data gaps and challenges avert authorities from
making more conclusive or empirical assessments of stablecoin activities. It
is characteristic that crypto asset markets risk being subject to fraud by
crypto asset sponsors.146 Moreover, asset digitization through distributed
ledger technology has transformed trading markets, and hundreds of crypto
assets are traded on various crypto exchanges, which means that the group
of tradable assets is growing.
Due to the fact that cryptocurrencies are highly volatile assets, it is
critical for investors to form a comprehensive investment strategy by
employing risk-management measures before entering this market so as to
mitigate the prospective for market crashes. Thus, investors should embrace
a comprehensive investment strategy by incorporating “trend following”
rules and respecting the impact of transaction costs. In this context, Trinh
Le and Ummul Ruthbah147 argue that
“both individual and institutional investors can benefit from
applying a momentum (risk overlay) strategy to invest in
crypto assets, as it allows them to capture the upside potential
and avoid the downside risk of these volatile instruments…

investors should carefully consider the trade-off between
transaction costs and portfolio rebalancing when
implementing trend-following strategies in crypto markets”.
It could be argued that there is a need to estimate the value of crypto assets.
It has to be taken into account that crypto lending platforms contribute to
the transformation by drawing crypto-asset deposits from retail customers
with high interest rates and using those funds to make loans. Hence, lending
platforms use customer assets to make undercollateralized loans, which
means that when lending platforms use depositors’ assets to raise leveraged
positions, and so, they escalate the fragility of the crypto ecosystem. Thus,
lending platforms provide collateralized crypto-asset loans to retail
customers and uncollateralized or partially collateralized loans to crypto-
native institutions.148 It is characteristic that Ruchi Patel149 indicates that
“crypto-colonization has relied heavily on the neoliberal
policies, populist discourse…The resulting coalition of the
crypto state and crypto elite has facilitated novel forms of
territorial, resource, and political control at local and national
scales. Despite the novelty of the crypto political economy, it
inevitably reproduces the uneven, extractive, and neocolonial
dynamics of neoliberal development in that it feeds on Global
South geographies to export value North. Bitcoin thus serves
foreign capital investment, accumulation, and imaginaries
rather than the needs and systemic challenges of the poor.
What is most worrisome is that the new crypto order operates
with little transparency, oversight, or accountability of
potentially harmful practices—from the so-called aid
programs of Bitcoin Beach to wider crypto development and
land grabbing schemes throughout the coast”.
The economic value of distributed ledger technologies (DLTs) is growing
due to their implications for the future of payment systems. The advent of

stablecoins has accelerated the development of central bank digital
currencies. Is there a shift in the usage of stablecoins? Stablecoins started
out as on-chain cash balances for crypto exchanges and traders, but they
resemble a form of general-purpose money tokenized on public
blockchains. It has to be taken into account that the business of crypto
exchanges has been shifting toward institutional customers, as asset
managers have adopted cryptocurrencies. Gordon Y. Liao150 et al. reveal
that,
“since 2021, each dollar of payment stablecoin has supported
approximately half the trading volume in cryptocurrency
assets compared to each dollar of M2 money supply
supporting traditional asset trading…the correlation between
the growth of payment stablecoins in circulation and crypto
asset returns is relatively weak, unlike the correlation found
between trading stablecoins and crypto asset returns as well as
the relationship between M2 money supply and equity market
returns”.
Hence, the rise of cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance raises central
questions regarding the nature of trust and money in the digital area.
Moreover, Raphael Auer151 et al. argue that
“the footprint of the current generation of cryptocurrencies
does not mark a sharp departure from the existing financial
ecosystem. Instead of relying on a trust-free—ie on-chain—
environment, a new set of agents has come to the fore that is
offering convenience, market access, transaction scale and
liquidity to these markets in much the same manner as in
commercial banking and securities trading, albeit without the
same degree of regulatory and supervisory oversight”.

Additionally, Mosioma and Walker152 explain that, of the 16 leading
cryptocurrency platforms, just four are subject to trading regulation. On the
other hand, cryptocurrencies and their intermediaries, involving crypto
exchanges, should be subject to the same kinds of regulation and oversight
as economically equivalent asset classes and institutions, concerning
financial stability, consumer protection, and AML/CFT standards.
Furthermore, it has to be taken into consideration that the degree of
decentralization of DeFi platforms differs within the DeFi industry, and so,
some 
intermediaries, 
known 
as 
systemically 
important 
crypto
intermediaries (SICIs), have secured large market shares or offer critical
valuation services to many DeFi Stacks. On the other hand, it is supposed
that decentralized platforms have appeared in order to avoid intermediaries
via blockchain technologies. To that extent, the malfunction of the Terra-
Luna stablecoin algorithm initiated a large-scale decline causing severe
volatility of crypto-asset prices and so, the crypto industry suffered losses.
It is characteristic that in the cryptocurrency market materialized pump-
and-dump schemes, a traditional form of securities fraud, and so, fraudsters
use social media platforms such as Telegram, Discord, and Twitter to first
spread false information and manipulate the price of low market-cap crypto
assets, and afterward they sell their holdings to make a profit, triggering a
fall in prices and investors to lose money.153 In other words, it seems that
“pump-and-dump” schemes are fraudulent practices encompassing the
artificial inflation of stock prices through deceptive statements, and so,
these schemes involve selling overvalued securities for a profit, leaving
unsuspecting buyers with valueless investments. Moreover, “pump-and-
dump” manipulation becomes profitable in the presence of technical
traders, who manipulate information asymmetry and produce returns by
raising prices and selling immediately. To that extent, stock prices increase
as a result of information asymmetry and the influence of spammers. Dean
Fantazzini and Yufeng Xiao154 argue that detecting pump-and-dumps in real
time implicates high-dimensional data, which means that AAI technology is
the answer to any “pump-and-dump” scheme by detecting the anomalies via
the speedy analysis of data and so prohibiting any insider trading from
taking place.

It is worth noting that crypto asset trading is subject to laws combating
money laundering, illegal imports, terrorist financing, and tax evasion; thus,
leading digital platform operators in the United States and abroad have
acceded to regulation as money transmission services.155 John M. Griffin
and Kevin Mei156 reveal that
“the “legitimate” crypto space commonly serves as the entry
and exit point to the illegitimate space and in so is facilitating
the cheap and easy flow of funds that is the lifeblood enabling
both pig butchering and modern-day slavery. Overall, our
findings suggest that criminal networks are moving substantial
funds cheaply and without much fear of detection”.
It is characteristic that Bittrex, Coinbase, and Binance, among the leading
crypto exchanges in the world, found themselves charged with functioning
as unregistered securities intermediaries in the United States, and the SEC
assumed jurisdiction over a broad range of crypto asset platforms under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which means regulating crypto asset
platforms and public trading in crypto assets.157 The extensibility of digital
ledger technology gives crypto asset platforms the potential to disrupt
financial services. Moreover, crypto asset trading creates risks to the
financial stability of the broader marketplace, which means that there is a
need for proactively neutralizing new technologies’ possibly destabilizing
systemic consequences. Otherwise, there will be a need of backing up an
uncontrollable and indefensibly self-referential financial system.158
2.11 Crypto Market Developments
It is characteristic that progress in digital technology for financial services
has led to growth in markets for digital assets, with overwhelming effects
on the protection of consumers, investors, and businesses, embracing data
privacy and security, financial stability, systemic risk, and digital tokens.
Moreover, the likelihood of switching from traditional markets to the crypto
market has augmented systemic risk; thus, informed investors begin
increasing investments in the market, trapping uninformed investors into

the market and then dropping the price by cutting off demand. In other
words, the crypto market functions as a shadow system of traditional
markets, and so not regulating the crypto market means that the risk will
merely travel from the regulated market to the unregulated one.
Originally, governments embraced a laissez-faire approach, leaving the
crypto market unregulated and thus having to deal with the consequences of
unregulated 
decentralized 
finance 
(DeFi), 
which 
is 
based 
on
cryptocurrencies.159 H. Y. Jabotinsky and R. Sarel160 argue that “empirical
analysis reveals an interesting pattern: investors initially shifted funds to the
crypto market when the pandemic erupted, but then made a U-turn and
diverted funds out of cryptocurrencies, leading to a plunge in the market.”
For the reason that many cryptocurrencies behave as securities, the SEC
began enforcing the usual securities regulations regarding disclosure on
some existing tokens.161 An incorrect interpretation of a token’s current
price is possible if investors rely on incomplete or false data, and so,
herding increases systemic risk, which means that price bubbles arise and,
simultaneously, bubbles are bursting when people herd in the opposite
direction.162 Thus, herding in the crypto market is expected as long as much
of the relevant information required for correct pricing is dispersed. It has to
be taken into consideration that the crypto market will either lessen
systemic risk by granting investors an alternative during a crisis or
exaggerate the problem through spillovers to other markets.
AI agents, by being autonomous software entities capable of adjusting,
learning, and accomplishing multi-step functions, are restructuring
economic formations and governance in decentralized settings. In addition,
AI agents are altering how machines interact with their environments and
execute missions autonomously, and so, their undertakings are extending
from simple rule-based systems to high-tech entities powered by LLMs. To
that extent, the current evolution in LLMs has inspired the design and
functionality of AI agents.163 The market for AI agents in the crypto
economy is just arising; therefore, monetary values and monetary policy of
states will be tested first in a global environment and later on the AAI
society will give another substance to monetary value in a purely AI
economy.

