Chapter 6
Data Science and Big Data
Over the last decade, there has been a lot of hype about data
science and big data. The hype has resulted in much excitement
and has encouraged many students, researchers, academicians,
and organizations to get interested in this subject.
Organizations have become interested in using data science to
reduce ineﬃciencies and generate growth. Students,
researchers, and professionals have become interested in
learning data science due to the exciting work in this subject.
This also has created new career opportunities and new job
titles such as “data scientists” and “data engineers.” The Google
Trends chart in Figure 6.1 indicates this hype. The trend clearly
shows the increased interest in these search terms since 2014:
data science, machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, deep
learning and big data.1 Furthermore, the trend has been rising
recently and clearly, and search queries on “Machine Learning”
have surpassed other terms and clearly show the increasing
public interest. However, it would be unfair to say that all that
the research in this domain has been carried out in last few
years. Most of the research and algorithms in data science have
resulted from decades of work by statisticians, mathematicians,
and scientists.
The recent increase in the use of data science and machine
learning algorithms is due to the availability of data and high
computing power:
–Availability of data has increased usage of digital devices
and services, and the rise in usage of sensors technology and
connected objects has led to the generation of more and
more data. Moreover, cheaper storage is available to collect
and store the data.
–High computing power has become available at a low cost to
process big datasets and use these complex algorithms.2
Figure 6.1: Google Trends, 2004–2018
In the midst of all this hype, there is a lot of confusion within
this topic due to considerable noise in the literature. Many
people get lost in the maze of terms like data science, machine
learning, deep learning, and big data and do not know where to
start. This chapter aims to clear up this confusion by providing
a concise overview of data science and big data for business
practitioners and discussing some commonly faced questions
such as What are data science, big data, AI, machine learning?
What are the applications of data science used in industry?
Moreover, what are the learnings and challenges of data science
projects? We introduce some basic data science concepts and
big data tools, and discuss the typical data science project
lifecycle in an organization.
Applications of Data Science and Big Data
Data science and big data are ﬁrmly embedded today in a lot of
products and services that meet our daily needs. Some common
examples of everyday applications of data science and big data
include
–Biometrics, such as face and ﬁngerprint recognition, for
unlocking phones using our faces or ﬁnger
–Matching drivers and commuters to simplify booking rides
using taxi or other ride apps
–Recommendations for watching videos and shopping on e-
commerce websites
–Targeting, such as product advertisements based on search
engine history
The exciting part is that most of these products have come into
existence within the past one to two decades and have become
a part of our daily routines. Such widespread use of data
science has arguably led tech companies such as Google,
Facebook, Amazon, Netﬂix, and others to proliferate and
disrupt existing businesses, and to create new products and
experiences for their customers.
Now, let us illustrate in more detail some industry use cases
where data science and big data are used and have proven to
be successful:
–Promotional emails and digital ads: On a typical day, people
are contacted by several promotional email messages, SMS
messages, or ads for things such as hotel discounts, airline
vouchers, and shopping discounts. Sometimes, these
promotional messages are targeted explicitly to speciﬁc
customers. With the advent of the internet, companies have
been gathering and storing extensive data related to their
customers, such as customer demographics, past purchases,
browsing patterns, and aﬄuence level. They use this data to
understand the characteristics of their customers and build
machine learning models based on those characteristics to
identify the likelihood of a customer responding to a
particular ad at a given moment. Depending on this
likelihood, customers are contacted with the right oﬀers and
in many cases even personalized oﬀers. This helps
companies increase their sales by cross-selling and up-
selling and also improve customer experience and
engagement.
–Recommendation engines: Everyday, we come across
various recommendation engines, such as for friends on
Facebook, videos on YouTube, products on Amazon, and
movies on Netﬂix. These systems show personalized
oﬀerings to people based on factors like their search
histories and preferences. It is widely known that Amazon
uses recommendation algorithms to personalize the
shopping experience for each customer. Customers see
recommended items that are based on their previous
browsing behavior, product ratings, similar product
purchases and other factors.3 Along similar lines, Netﬂix
recommends personalized content (movies and TV shows)
based on a user’s viewing history and ratings, the viewing
history of similar users, and so forth. Furthermore, these
recommendations are diverse, include new releases, and
adapt with time in response to changing user preferences.4
–Risk management: Banks and credit card companies have
used credit scores to evaluate loan or credit card
applications for many years. Credit scores typically indicate
the risk level of a customer, such as the likelihood of a
customer to default. The model takes into consideration
several parameters, such as payment history, length of credit
history, inquiries, and income, to predict a customer’s
likelihood to default by comparing them to similar
characteristics of other customers who have defaulted in the
past.5
–Fraud detection: Fraud does not have a constant pattern.
Fraud detection model is an evolving process, and by
investigating and ﬂagging more and more frequent cases,
cases of fraud can be identiﬁed. In the case of credit card
companies, investigating a large number of transactions one
by one is not possible. Therefore, fraud detection models are
used that can auto-approve legitimate transactions and raise
alerts in case of any transactions that appear fraudulent.
Events such as a sudden big purchase after many small
purchases, purchases that do not ﬁt the cardholder’s proﬁle,
and unusual geographical locations can raise suspicion and
block the transaction or card automatically.
What Is Data Science?
The term “data science” has been ﬂoating in various literature,
journals and lecture notes for many years. In 1962, John Tukey,
in his paper “The Future of Data Analysis,” pointed to the
existence of an unrecognized “science” that dealt with the
subject of learning from the data.6 Later in 2001, William S.
Cleveland from Bell Labs proposed to expand the ﬁeld of
statistics to data analysis by emphasizing the importance of
data preparation, computation, and presentation rather than
statistical modeling.7 However, the term “data science” gained
widespread popularity more recently in 2012 through a
Harvard Business Review article “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job
of the 21st Century.”8 In academia or industry, there is no single
approved deﬁnition of data science because it is a broad term
encompassing many domains, which leads to diﬀerent views
and ambiguity.
However, in simple terms, one can understand data science
as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that uses the concepts of statistics,
mathematics, computer science, and domain expertise to
extract meaningful insights from data that can generate some
business value. A data scientist is someone who is a specialist in
these three domains and extracts meaning from the data by
performing data and statistical analysis; building and applying
machine learning models and algorithms; and visualizing,
summarizing and communicating the results. Figure 6.2
describes a data scientist with skills from these three domains.
In reality, it is hard to ﬁnd someone who is a perfect data
scientist—highly skilled in all three domains. Therefore,
organizations build data science teams with people of
complementary skillsets.
The terms, “business analytics” and “data analytics” have
been used popularly over the years and are often confused with
data science. Overall, there is a blurred diﬀerence between
analytics and data science, and therefore these terms are
sometimes used interchangeably. Our interpretation of this
blurred diﬀerence is that the role of a business/ data analyst
involves using a lot of domain expertise and data analysis to
generate insights from the data, whereas the role of a data
scientist is slightly broader and includes machine learning
modeling and programming. In many cases, the responsibilities
of a data scientist also include data analysis, building models
and developing those models into products or services.
Source: Drew Conway’s Data Science Venn Diagram. [Online]. Available: htt
p://drewconway.com/zia/2013/3/26/the-data-science-venn-diagramce:
Figure 6.2: Data scientist Venn diagram
Machine Learning vs. Artificial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a ﬁeld of computer science focused
on making computers more intelligent so that they can imitate
intelligent human behavior. AI is a medium to enable
computers to learn and engage in human-like thought
processes, such as learning, reasoning and self-correction.
Traditionally, this involved hard-coding knowledge about the
world in the form of computer programs, but success was
limited because most human knowledge grows with
experiences and is subjective, intuitive and challenging to
articulate using a set of rules. The introduction of machine
learning enabled computers to learn real-world knowledge by
identifying patterns from the data, self-correction from this
learning process to enable decision making [9]. However,
machine learning algorithms also suﬀered from a trade-oﬀ as
their performance was dependent on how data was presented
to them. Deep learning algorithms solved this problem by
extracting information by itself. Deep learning is a particular
type of machine learning that makes the computer learning
more powerful, ﬂexible and abstract. The Venn diagram in Figu
re 6.3 illustrates how these concepts are interrelated.
Source: Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Deep Learning, The
MIT Press, 2016
Figure 6.3: AI, machine learning, and deep learning Venn diagram
What Data Science Is Not
AI, machine learning, and deep learning do not comprise a
branch of data science. Rather, data science uses them to solve
problems. Consider machine learning as a statistical toolkit that
helps machines learn based on historical data and make
predictions on the new data. On the other hand, data science is
a broader term that includes the process for building this
machine learning model, including data collection, data
processing, data analysis, data visualization, modeling, making
predictions, and so forth.
Big data also is not a branch of data science. Data science
can be used to solve problems using various types and sizes of
datasets.
What Is Big Data?
The origin of the term “big data” is still ambiguous, but one of
the early and popular deﬁnitions is that big data is the amount
of data that traditional database software tools cannot manage
and analyze due to the complexity and size.9 In simple terms,
big data means large data, where large depends on the context
and computational processing power. According to a report by
IBM in 2013, about 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created each
day in the world.10 The pace of creation is only accelerating
with the growth of internet access, increase in mobile usage,
and IoT (internet of things) devices around the world. Data
points are created in our daily activities, such as:
–Social media activity (Twitter tweets and messages;
Facebook likes, shares and messages)
–Search engine activity (Google searches, creating web pages)
–Video streaming (watching or uploading videos on YouTube
or Netﬂix)
–Payments (using credit cards, internet banking)
To make any use of this data, it needs to be captured. In the
past, data storage was quite expensive and ineﬃcient, so
storing big datasets was a challenge. Now, there are better and
more economical data storage solutions that make it easier to
store and process the data.
IBM deﬁned big data in association with four Vs: volume
(size of the data), velocity (speed at which the data is created,
stored, analyzed and visualized), variety (diﬀerent data sources
for structured and unstructured data), and veracity
(trustworthiness of the data for any analysis in terms of
accuracy and ambiguity, for example).11 Other researchers have
deﬁned big data as three Vs, six Vs and so on. Although there
are several critiques of the V model, one thing is clear: there is a
lot of data available that can be used for solving numerous
business problems using data science.
Data Science and Big Data in Industry Practice
The key steps required in any data science project are shown in
Figure 6.4. Regardless of the problem, any data science project
can be deployed by following these steps. The multi-step
lifecycle, from deﬁning the problem to experimentation, is
explained in this section. The big data technology stack used in
this process, and also shown in Figure 6.4, is explained in the
section “Big Data Technology Stack.”
Figure 6.4: Data science project lifecycle
Step 1—Defining the Problem
Before starting to work on a data science task, the ﬁrst step is to
deﬁne the objective of the business problem clearly. This
involves answering questions about diﬀerent aspects of the
problem, such as
–What is the business problem and how to translate it into a
data science problem?
–What data is required for the problem and how to collect
and to prepare it?
–What insights can be generated from the data and what
machine learning/deep learning models can be useful for the
problem?
–How to build and evaluate the model, deﬁne success (KPIs,
metrics, and so on) for the solution of the problem?
–How to measure the impact of a machine learning model in
the real world?
In practice, it is essential to simplify and structure the problem
at this stage and precisely answer these questions. Depending
on how the problem is structured at this step, the subsequent
steps of data collection, data preparation modeling, model
evaluation and experimentation can be diﬀerent. This is
illustrated using the following example over the course of the
chapter:
Loan Delinquency Problem
A bank has disbursed personal loans to 800,000 existing
savings/credit card customers over the last ﬁve years (2013–
2018). This loan scheme was expected to help customers and
also bring additional revenue to the bank; however an
investigation revealed that the scheme resulted in losses to the
bank. The loan is supposed to be repaid in the form of monthly
installments—where the installment amount and number of
installments depend on the loan amount, loan tenure and
agreed interest rate. When the bank is unable to debit any
monthly installments for a month from the bank account, the
loan is considered to be “delinquent.”
Since 2013, the delinquency rate is ~10 percent, or 1 out of
10 customers missed on their payment, but customers are
charged with a hefty fee in case of any missed installment
leading to dissatisfaction. The probability of missing payment is
not yet considered in any risk management/account
management decisions in the bank, which if considered can
enhance the performance of savings/ credit card portfolio as
well. Given this information, bank management has requested
that its data science team identify customers who are most
likely to miss payment of the loan installment in next three
months so that these customers receive a telephone reminder.
Bank management believes that such preventive action can
keep some customers from missing payment and wants to test
out this hypothesis. After its success is established, management
would like to make telephone reminders a regular practice. It is
also known that the bank’s call center’s capacity is calling only
30,000 customers per month. Therefore, it is essential to
identify the right customers to call at the right time.
Given this problem statement, what are diﬀerent ways to
structure this problem into a data science problem?
–Objective: The problem involves ﬁnding top 30,000
customers with the highest likelihood to miss payment of
their loan installment in the next three months so that they
can receive telephone reminders. A few ways to approach
this problem are
Approach 1: Identify customers whose account
balance falls below a certain amount, say, two to three
times the amount of monthly loan installment. This
approach might work well; however, it does not take
into account the fluctuations in the account balance
over the month. For example, some customers
routinely pay their installments but have to wait for
their pay to be deposited and might not need to be
called. Can this be further improved?
Approach 2: Analyze the historical characteristics of
customers who have missed payment of their loan
installment in the past and understand the reasons
behind it. For example, customers aged 30-40 years
with income below $2500 per month are more likely
to miss payment than other customers. Such insights
can be used to generate rules to filter the right set of
customers. Can these rules be further improved? Can
these rules be made more robust?
Approach 3: Create a machine learning model using
historical customer behavior and characteristics to
predict a score for the likelihood to miss payment in
the next three months. This score would be specific to
each customer and can change with time.
–Data collection and preparation: To proceed with any of
these approaches, having data about customers who have
missed a payment vs not missed any payment since 2013 can
be useful. This data can be used to study the characteristics,
such as customer account balance history, demographics,
and loan details that can help to understand underlying
reasons for missing payments. The sections “Step 2—Data
Collection” and “Step 3—Data Preparation” describe how to
gather the right data for the problem and various methods
to collect and prepare such data.
–Modeling: In the case of Approach 3, this step can be used to
gauge which machine learning models would be useful for
the given problem. The “Modeling” section describes the
types of machine learning models suitable for diﬀerent
problems and steps needed to build any model.
–Model evaluation: After the machine learning model is built,
it is useful to evaluate its performance. This step is needed to
gauge the performance of the model (how correctly the
model can predict customers with high likelihood to miss
payments in the next three months) before starting to call
those customers.
–Experimentation: Although a model can help identify such
customers who are likely to miss payment in next three
months, it is necessary to test whether the model works in
the real world. Experiments can be carried out to check
model accuracy and the impact of calling. For example,
customers with a high likelihood to miss payment can be
identiﬁed and either called or not called to answer these
questions:
–Does calling customers with a high likelihood of delinquency
actually prevent them from missing their payment?
–Do customers with a high likelihood of delinquency end up
missing their payment when they are not called?
–Do customers with a high likelihood of delinquency end up
missing their payment even after being called?
Answering such questions and analyzing the results can help to
measure the success of the model in the real world. The “Step 5
—Experimentation” section describes how such experiments
can be designed.
Step 2—Data Collection
After precisely deﬁning the problem, the next step is to gather
relevant data for that problem. This is done by following a
systematic approach to gather various data from the variety of
sources to get a complete picture of the problem. The diﬀerent
types of data are discussed below.
Based on the source, data can be mainly categorized into:
primary data and secondary data:
–Primary data is the data that is gathered from the ﬁrst-hand
experiences of a researcher for a speciﬁc project. Usually,
collecting primary data involves a lot of time, eﬀort, and
cost. Examples of primary data include data collected using
questionnaires, interviews, surveys, experiments, and so on.
–Secondary data is the data that was already collected and
recorded in the past for a diﬀerent problem. Usually,
secondary data is readily available, so it is widely used in
data science projects. Examples of secondary data include
private datasets (for example, internal companies’ records),
datasets for sale (such as those available through data
aggregator companies), scraping websites, and public
datasets (like government publications, books, journal
articles, and so forth).
Care should be taken to ensure that data is relevant for the
business problem and captures suﬃcient events of interest.
Both primary and secondary data can be used for a data science
problem, but in most cases, secondary data is used. This is
because secondary data is cheap and provides a longer history,
which includes more data points that could give more insights
even though it is less accurate when compared to primary data.
For the loan delinquency problem, secondary data from
internal bank systems can be used containing details such as:
–Customer demographics (age, gender, income, location)
–Bank account details (number of accounts, tenure of the
bank account, account status—active, inactive, or other)
–Account transaction details (types of transactions, amounts
spend on diﬀerent transactions)
–Loan details (loan status—delinquency, defaults, paid-up, or
other; principal loan amount; outstanding loan amount, the
total number of paid installments, date of delinquency)
–Other data, such as customer interaction details and website
usage
Types of Data
Raw data (including primary and secondary data) is not always
of great quality. The quality of data mainly depends on how the
data is captured, what tools are used to capture it and what
measures are used to ensure the right type. There are mostly
three types in which data is captured, namely structured
datasets, semi-structured datasets and unstructured datasets.
Their diﬀerences are shown in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Differences between Structured, Semi-Structured and Unstructured Data
Traditionally, models have worked well on structured and semi-
structured data but not so well on unstructured data (audio,
images, and patterns in the text). But recent machine learning
and deep learning algorithms are signiﬁcantly better at
interpreting even unstructured data, which has led to many
new exciting applications such as speech recognition, image
recognition, and natural language processing on text. For the
loan delinquency problem, all three types of data can be used
depending on how the data is available in the bank systems. For
example, both customer demographics recorded in structured
databases and customer interactions recorded in the form of
emails or voice recordings can be used.
Levels of Data
Structured data is captured at several levels. In this context, a
“level” is the smallest unit of the data. For example, a
transaction is the smallest level when money is transferred
from one bank account to another. This transaction is captured
as one row in the data. Similarly, a social security number
uniquely represents a person, and one person will have
consistent characteristics, such as gender and place of birth,
associated with this social security number. Therefore, data can
be captured at a person level using the social security number.
On the other hand, for semi-structured and unstructured data,
the levels may or may not be there. For example, unstructured
text or images do have such levels. Table 6.2 illustrates diﬀerent
levels of data capture.
Table 6.2: Levels of Data
Level Each Row Represents Data gathered at each levels
Event One event Data for each event, like the time of a
banking transaction
Entity One user, product
family, or other such
entityFor example, age, gender, demographics,
aggregation of event level data to user
level—customer’s month-end ledger
balance
Segment One segment For example, a list of cities with average
income more than $30,000
Data with more granularity captures more information. For
example, a customer’s daily banking transaction amounts
provide more information about the customer’s transaction
behavior than the total transaction amount for the bank.
Therefore, in the loan delinquency problem, event or user level
data would be more useful than segment level.
Step 3—Data Preparation
After gathering data from various sources, the next step is to
process and transform this data into a useable form for the
analysis. Often data is collected from various sources, so it is
untidy—has inconsistent data types, useful columns spread
across multiple ﬁles, etc. Data preparation involves steps such
as performing quality checks, ﬁltering, and aggregating, joining,
concatenating diﬀerent datasets, creating features so that it can
be used to generate some meaningful insights and further used
for modeling tasks. The ﬁrst step of data preparation is
performing data quality checks. Data collected in the real world
for practical purposes is usually of poor quality—data has
incorrectly captured information, missing values, duplicate
records, and so forth. Therefore, it is essential to perform
quality checks (QCs) on the data and address issues before
proceeding.
Data Quality Checks
The ideal method for performing data quality checks is to check
every record against the source system. But if there is a large
number of records across many ﬁles, such a method can be
cumbersome. Therefore, some pragmatic means are needed to
gauge the quality of the data. Some of the typical measures used
to perform data quality checks include the following:12
–Completeness: Check whether all intended datasets and data
items (ﬁelds, values) are captured. Compare the numbers of
rows, columns, and ﬁelds; the size of the data at the source
data; and the available data to ensure completeness.
–Accuracy: Secondary data is not as accurate as primary data,
but realistically, it should be checked to determine how well
the data represents real-world observations and events.
Therefore, check whether the data was captured accurately:
By reconciling it with third-party source data that is
trustworthy or confirming insights with the business
teams.
By checking for abnormal values in data, such as
values that are too high or too low, or missing or
incorrect values (numerical or categorical). If
abnormal values account for too many of those in a
column, then the result of data analysis can be biased.
Thus, all abnormal values should be treated.
–Uniqueness: Check whether all records are uniquely
captured; that is, there is no duplicate information. Identify
the unique keys of the data (for example, bank account
number or customer ID) and check if the dataset is unique
across these keys. For example—if same customer across
one customer ID has duplicate records then de-duplicate the
data by either removing duplicate rows or aggregating them
to the customer ID level.
–Consistency: Check whether the data is consistent with
diﬀerent representations of the same information across
multiple datasets; that is, there is no diﬀerence between two
representations of the same data. This can be done by
analyzing patterns and verifying insights from the data
ﬁelds. For example—dataset is inconsistent if number of
registered bank customers is less than number of active
bank customers.
–Validity: Check whether data conforms to the standard data
deﬁnitions, such as data types, size and format. This can be
done by analyzing the data types of ﬁelds in the source data
and available data.
Exploratory Data Analysis
After completing the quality checks on the data, the next step is
to perform exploratory data analysis (EDA), or descriptive
analysis. EDA is an approach to analyze the data by
summarizing its main characteristics into summary statistics
and graphical representations. For example, we might carry out
a univariate analysis (such as frequency or central tendency—
mean, median, and mode) on diﬀerent variables, and perform a
bivariate analysis, such as analyzing variables with each other
and analyzing variables with the target variable. In the context
of machine learning, the variable that is predicted is called the
output variable or business outcome or target variable. In the
loan delinquency problem, the target variable has two
outcomes: delinquent (customers who miss payment of loan
installment in the next three months) and non-delinquent
(customers do not miss payment of loan installment in the next
three months). This is illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Target creation
At this step, it is also important to realize that dataset should be
ﬁltered for appropriate customer cohort i.e. customers with
that speciﬁc personal loan. EDA can help generate insights by
analyzing diﬀerent variables for the customers of interest. In
this problem, variables such as the customer’s month-end
ledger balance, age, account tenure, and so on, can also be
useful to look into. EDA could help us analyze account balance
with respect to the target variable to tell whether there is any
account balance pattern that suggests whether a customer is
likely to miss payment. Overall, the objective of EDA is to try
and ﬁnd these speciﬁc patterns from the data. For example, Tab
le 6.3 suggests that customers with lower month-end ledger
balances are more likely to miss on payments than other
customers as delinquency rate increases with the decrease in
balance. On the other hand, diﬀerent age buckets do not
indicate any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in delinquency rates.
Table 6.3: Exploratory Data Analysis Using Tables
Month-end Ledger Balance ($) Delinquency Rate
Less than 2500 15%
2500–5000 8%
5000–7500 9%
7500–10000 7%
Greater than 10000 5%
Age Buckets (Years) Delinquency Rate
Under 25 10%
25–50 9.5%
50–75 9%
Over 75 11%
There are several approaches to performing an exploratory
data analysis:
–Tables: Summarize the data in the form of tables (as in Table
6.3) and generate insights.
–Visualization: Visualize these variables (as in Figure 6.6) in
graphical representations like histograms, pie-charts, or bar
charts.
–Correlations: Find correlations of these variables with each
other and with the target variable (in this case it’s
delinquent, Yes or No).
Figure 6.6: Exploratory data analysis
Feature Engineering
After completing an EDA, the next step is to represent raw data
in a format that captures these insights in the form that can be
fed to a machine learning model. Such
transformation/engineering of variables into the formats
suitable for the machine learning model is called feature
engineering, and transformed variables are called features.
Machine learning models take these features as input and learn
from them to predict the output. Feature engineering is one of
the crucial steps to build any machine learning model because
good features improve model performance by producing high-
quality output. In fact, a simple model with good features may
outperform a complex model with bad features. The idea of
feature engineering is to create more features using the data
and present them in a simpler way, which can inﬂuence the
output of your model. Often, feature engineering becomes a
necessity as a machine learning model needs data to be
presented in a certain way that it understands. Some models
are more appropriate for the certain type of features; therefore,
feature engineering involves creating the most appropriate
features given the data, model, and problem.
In the loan delinquency problem, if the selected model only
accepts numerical values, then any feature that is not numeric
would need to be either dropped or transformed into a
numeric. For example, in Table 6.4, a categorical feature
“highest education level” with four categories—Ph.D.,
Bachelors, Masters, and High School—would need to be either
dropped or transformed to a numeric ﬁeld that captures the
essence of these four categories. At the end, when all features
are combined, the resulting feature table would be like Table 6.
4.
Table 6.4: Feature Table
There is no right or wrong way to perform feature engineering,
but Table 6.5 shows some basic techniques which can be used
for structured data (example—tabular data) and unstructured
data (example—text data). Note feature engineering for other
unstructured data such as audios, videos and images are
beyond the scope of this discussion:
Table 6.5: Feature Engineering Techniques
Type of Data Technique Description and Examples*
Quantization/
binningContinuous numerical variables can be quantized
into fixed categories (binary or multiple groups).
For example, “age” can be quantized,
corresponding to different life stages, into 0-25
years, 25-50 years, 50-75 years, and 75 years or
older.
Structured data
(for example,
tabular data)Normalization/
scalingFeatures with drastically different scales can be
appropriately scaled before modeling. For
example, if income ranges from $2,000 to $50,000
and age ranges from 15 years to 100 years, then
income should be appropriately scaled to a
hundredth scale as age or vice versa.
New features New features can be created from existing features
to extract more information. This step should be
done by using inputs of business stakeholders. For
example, monthly income and expenses can be
used to create a new feature “monthly savings” to
identify customers who are not saving enough and
may need a personal loan.
Cleaning text Preprocessing and filtering can eliminate useless
data that adds noise. For example,
–Remove web page tags and attributes and
special characters such as punctuations,
alphanumeric characters, and symbols.
Unstructured
data (for
example,–Convert words to a single case (lower or upper),
remove stop words, frequent words and rare
words, and remove prefixes and suffixes.
text data) Feature
extractionNumerical features are extracted from clean,
processed/ text by using words as keys or features
and different word frequencies as values. Popular
feature extraction techniques include bag-of-words
(BoW) and term frequency-inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF).
*Note: Zheng, A. and Casari, A. (2018) Feature Engineering for Machine Learning,
California: O’Reilly.
Feature Matrix
After creating the features, the next step is to combine all the
engineered features from structured and unstructured data and
target column(s) into one table/matrix called feature matrix. A
feature table from Table 6.4 would transform into a feature
matrix as in Table 6.6 after feature engineering. Observe that a
variable such as gender is converted into columns
“Gender_Male” and “Gender_Female” with binary values (1 or
0); education” is converted as into 4 education level columns;
unstructured text such as “car” is used to create Bag-of-words
features like “BOW_car” and TF-IDF feature like “TF-IDF_car,”
etc. Now, this feature matrix can be easily fed into a machine
learning model.
Table 6.6: Feature Matrix
Note that this is just one illustration. Feature engineering steps
largely depend on the type of problem, data and machine
learning model one intends to use. For example, unsupervised
learning problems do not have a target variable; therefore, the
feature matrix would not have a target column. This is further
described in the next section. Also, not all features in the
feature matrix will be used in the model. Some categorical
features, such as gender and education, which have already
been converted into columns, can be dropped. Depending on
preference, one can choose to merge features diﬀerently, but
creating such a matrix makes it more eﬃcient to experiment
with feature selection in modeling.
Step 4—Modeling
After data collection and data preparation, the next step is to
build the right model for the problem. This section provides a
broad introduction to diﬀerent machine learning algorithms
with emphasis on how to build a model with the problem in
mind. Broadly, machine learning models can be classiﬁed into
two categories, supervised and unsupervised learning:
–Supervised learning involves building models to predict a
target using diﬀerent features. Often supervised machine
learning tasks include building models to estimate future
predictions using historical data, often called predictive
models. Typical predictive model problems include
classiﬁcation and regression:
Classification is a problem in which the target variable
is qualitative (two or more categories). The loan
delinquency problem is an example of the binary
classification problem where two prediction classes
are “Delinquent” and “Non-delinquent.” Other
examples include predicting whether an email is spam
and handwritten character recognition.
Regression is a problem in which the target variable is
a quantitative value (numeric), such as predicting loan
default amount for each customer. Typical examples
include sales forecasting, price prediction, and loan
default amount prediction.
–Unsupervised learning involves learning from the input data
without any target. In this case, the algorithm tries to use an
underlying structure of the data to ﬁnd useful associations
and patterns. Most of the raw data in the world does not
have a well-deﬁned target variable; therefore, unsupervised
learning techniques are applicable to a lot of problems.
Typical problems include clustering and association:
Clustering is a problem of dividing the data into
similar homogenous groups. Typical examples of
clustering include identifying similar customers based
on purchase behavior (customer segmentation),
similar documents, and clustering similar news
articles.
Association is a problem of finding associations
between different variables that can describe
characteristics of the data. Popular examples include
market basket analysis to find bundled products as
they are mostly bought together—mobile phones
with covers, milk and butter, beer and diaper.
Choice of Models
Several machine learning models have been developed that
cater to diﬀerent realworld problems. To apply a machine
learning model, it is essential to identify the type of task:
supervised learning (classiﬁcation, regression) and
unsupervised learning (clustering, association). Table 6.7
summarizes a few modeling algorithms.
Table 6.7: Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Models
Type of Learning Models
Supervised learning Naive Bayes
Linear models, such as linear or logistic regression
Decision tree
K-nearest neighbors (k-NN)
Bagging, such as random forest
Boosting, such as generalized boosting machine
Support vector machines (SVMs)
Neural networks
Unsupervised learning Clustering, such as k-means, hierarchical, or DBScan
Associations, such as a priori
Each of these models has their uses, advantages, and
disadvantages. One of the popular algorithms is linear
regression or logistic regression when there is a linear
association of features with the target, that is, target linearly
increases or decreases with a change in features. In many
industrial applications, linear models are adopted as they are
simple and quite interpretable. However, these models can
have limitations in terms of predictive power as real-world
associations between features and target may be nonlinear. In
such cases, nonlinear models, such as decision trees, bagging,
boosting, neural networks, and support vector machines,
should be used.
Model Building
A model is just a mathematical function that can be used to
represent the relation between features in the data. Practically,
there is no perfect model. One can only attempt to create good
models that can meet business needs. Building a model can be
an iterative process: one may try several models, a diﬀerent
combination of features, and diﬀerent modeling techniques
before ﬁnding one that satisﬁes the requirement.
There are several ways to build a supervised machine learning
model, but typically, models include training, validation, and
testing, as reﬂected in the following standard steps:
1. Split the data randomly into two sets, namely training data
and validation data. A good starting point is a ratio of 80/20
(80 percent training data and 20 percent validation data).
2. Training data is used to train or teach the model to predict
the target using the features. At this step, an appropriate
model should be chosen based on the learning task.
3. Validation data is used to evaluate the performance of the
model. At this step, errors in the model should be analyzed
and used to make some adjustments to the models, such as
tuning the model, selecting features, and making other
decisions regarding the learning algorithm.
4. Lastly, the final model obtained after training and validation
is applied to an entirely new dataset called the test dataset to
which the model has not previously been exposed. The
performance on the test set indicates the actual
performance of the final model, or what performance to
expect when using the model in the real world.
Please note that the preceding steps are not ﬁxed and can vary
depending on the problem, data, and approach. There are many
diﬀerent ways to split the data into training and validation data,
create test sets, and perform additional steps to ensure model
stability. Figure 6.7 summarizes the dataset splitting and
modeling approach.
Figure 6.7: The modeling process
Building an unsupervised learning model is often more
challenging than supervised learning model. Unsupervised
learning models do not have a target; therefore, there is no way
to check whether the model is performing well or poorly
because there is no clear right answer. Often performance
needs to be evaluated using past experience and domain
knowledge. This makes model building quite a subjective
process.
Model Evaluation
As described above, there is no perfect model. Every model
suﬀers from some errors. The process to evaluate the prediction
errors of a machine learning model is called error analysis.
Ideally, each prediction output of a model should be checked to
examine the error and understand its underlying cause.
However, manually doing these checks is time-consuming,
especially with large datasets. Therefore, evaluation metrics are
needed to gauge the overall prediction performance of the
model.
Machine learning oﬀers a large choice of evaluation metrics
depending on the task involved. For classiﬁcation tasks,
comparisons can be made between correct and wrong
predictions of the true target by using a commonly used error
matrix called a confusion matrix. For regression tasks, errors
can be measured between the predicted target and true target.
Table 6.8 shows some of the commonly used evaluation metrics
for classiﬁcation and regression tasks.
Table 6.8: Evaluation Metrics for Different Tasks
Task Evaluation Metrics
Classification Accuracy, recall, precision, F-measure, AUC ROC
Regression Root mean squared error (RMSE), adjusted R-squared
Error Analysis
To evaluate the performance of any machine learning model,
errors need to be measured and analyzed. There are primarily
three sources of errors in any machine learning model,
irreducible errors, bias, and variance.
An irreducible error (Bayes error or unavoidable bias) is an
error that cannot be reduced regardless of the modeling
algorithm. This type of error can be introduced by problem
objective, noise and errors in the data capture; unknown
variables that can inﬂuence each other and the target; and
other factor. No model is perfect, so an expectation of 100-
percent accuracy is simply unrealistic. Therefore, the objective
of modeling is to create a model that comes as close as possible
to the desired performance.13
Bias is another error which is introduced due to erroneous
assumptions in the model while variance is an error due to
variability in the model predictions. In simple terms, this
concept is explained in the bulls-eye diagram in Figure 6.8.14
The center of the concentric circle represents a perfect model
which predicts all targets correctly, and each dot represents one
model. Sometimes the model prediction is close to the ideal
model prediction while sometimes it is far oﬀ.
Source: Fortmann-Roe, Scott, Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoff, htt
p://scott.fortmann-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
Figure 6.8: Understanding bias and variance
Whereas bias measures how far oﬀ these model predictions are
from the perfect model, variance measures how far oﬀ the
model predictions are from each other. Typically, bias and
variance have competing properties, and improving one
usually compromises the other. That is, a low-bias model has
high variance, and a high-bias model has low variance.15 As
seen in Figure 6.9, with the increase in model complexity model
bias decreases but variance increases. The art is to ﬁnd a model
with the right level of complexity that has low bias and low
variance.16
Source: Fortmann-Roe, Scott, Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoff, htt
p://scott.fortmann-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
Figure 6.9: The bias vs variance tradeoff in a model
Suppose, after several modeling iterations on the loan
delinquency problem, diﬀerent error rates are calculated on
training and validation data. Out of all the customers in the
training dataset, the model is correctly able to predict 90
percent of customers if they would become delinquent or not.
Then the error rate of the model is 10 percent, which includes
irreducible errors, bias, and variances. After calculating errors
on diﬀerent iterations of the models, eﬀorts should be made to
reduce these errors as described in the following:
–A model with high bias is underﬁtting. That is, the model has
barely learned on the training set to even perform well on
validation and test sets. A good way to address this problem
is by increasing the model complexity, such as by adding
more features.
–A model with high variance is overﬁtting. That is, the model
has tried to capture too much information from the training
set and failed to generalize on new data. A good way to
address this problem is by adding more training data.
Ideally, a model with low bias and low bias is a good model
which should be ﬁnally selected.
Model Improvement
After evaluating the errors, the next step is to improve the
performance of the model further to create a ﬁnal model. Note
that model improvement is also an iterative process and the
modeling process goes through the steps of data collection, data
preparation, modeling and evaluation again and again. There is
no completely right or wrong way to do this, but the following
points should be kept in mind while experimenting with model
improvement:
–Add external data, such as census data or credit scores, to
create new features.
–Add more and more features but at the same time include
features that inﬂuence the target.
–Have training, validation and test sets with sizes suﬃcient to
have statistically signiﬁcant data points to learn training and
validation error rates.
–Use modeling technique suitable for the problem.
–Control for model complexity and generalization by
reducing the number of features.
Step 5—Experimentation
Model evaluation techniques only help to evaluate the
theoretical performance of the model on the validation and test
sets. But theoretical performance does not guarantee the
success of the model in real-world. For example, in the loan
delinquency problem, customers identiﬁed as high likelihood to
miss payment of loan installment would need some action such
as reminder calls in order to prevent them missing their
payment. A campaign can be designed to make preventive calls
to all such customers. In practice, there can be lot of operational
issues (e.g. capacity of call center, script designing and training
to call center agents, IT issues in implementing the new process,
data privacy/ information security especially in case of
outsourced call center, etc.), in executing such a campaign.
Therefore, it is essential to conduct such campaigns on small
scale i.e. on small customer base, learn and address these issues
before implementing such campaigns regularly for all
customers. In addition to this, testing the model on a small base
can also help in observing quantitative beneﬁts from this
exercise and qualitative feedback from customers.
Experiments should be designed in such campaigns in order to
test out diﬀerent hypothesis and quantify the actual impact of
the models and know whether it meets the desired
expectations. There are many diﬀerent ways to design an
experiment, but the following are important general steps:
1.Deﬁne a relevant success metric that meets the business
objective. Examples of such metrics are conversion rate,
customer retention rate, saving costs, or crosssell rate.
2.Divide the population randomly into groups to measure the
performance improvement of the model. One of the ways is
to design an A/ B test with two groups:
a.A test group, on which the output of the model is
tested
b.A control group that does not use model output
3.Execute the experiment and measure the success metric for
the test and control groups
In the loan delinquency problem, an A/ B test can be designed
to measure (a) the impact of then model (do the customers
identiﬁed as having a high likelihood to miss payment actually
end up missing payment) and (b) the impact of preventive
reminder calls to customers using the call center (does call
center calling prevent customers from missing payment).
Following the preceding steps, an experiment can be designed
as follows (see Figure 6.10):
1.The success metric can be deﬁned as the “delinquency rate”:
the percentage of customers who missed out their payment
during the three months of campaign duration
2.Divide the population into test and control groups in equal
proportions with enough samples to measure the
performance between the groups:
a.Test group: The customers identiﬁed by the model as
having a high likelihood to miss payment.
Furthermore, divide the test group into two more
groups: Group A, the customers who are called by the
call center, and Group B, the customers who are not
called.
b.Control group: The customers who are randomly
selected or selected using some existing rules (that is,
without applying the model). Similarly, divide the
control groups into two more groups: Group C, the
customers who are called, and Group D, the customers
who are not called.
3.An experiment can be conducted to measure the
delinquency rate success metric over these four groups to
quantify the real impact of the model based on the real
impact of preventive calling. The call center can actively call
customers under Group A and Group C, while customers
under Group B and Group D can be left without calling.
Figure 6.10: The A/B test design
After all the customers are successfully contacted, the
delinquency rate of these groups should be measured over
three months to observe whether the model and preventive
calling helped. Ideally, if the model and preventive calling has a
positive impact, the following should be true:
–The delinquency rate of Group B should be more than that of
Group D. This would mean that the model is correctly able to
identify customers who would miss payment: customers in
Group B (who have a high likelihood to miss payment as per
the model) end up missing payment more than the randomly
selected customers in Group D.
–The delinquency rate of Group A should be less than that of
Group B. This would mean that preventive calling leads to a
lower delinquency rate in the customers identiﬁed by the
model as having a high likelihood to miss payment. This is
because customers in both Group A and Group B are
identiﬁed from the model, but only Group A customers are
called. Similarly, the delinquency rate of Group C should also
be less than that of Group D.
–The delinquency rate of Group A also can be compared with
the delinquency rate of Group C to measure the impact of
the model on the customers who are called. Note that the
impact of preventive calling can have diﬀerent eﬀects on
customers from Group A (high likelihood to miss payment)
and Group C (random customers). For example, preventive
calling can remind customers and eventually reduce the
delinquency rate, or it may have no impact at all as those
customers might have already decided to miss payment.
These measurements can easily help quantify the success of the
model and success of preventive calling. Additionally, these
impacts also can be estimated in terms of dollar value to
quantify the business impact. Once the success of the model
and preventive calling is established from this experiment,
bank management can implement such campaigns regularly.
This can be done by preparing such list of customers with high
likelihood to miss payment and conduct preventive calling
every month.
Big Data Technology Stack
This section describes the big data technology stack, which
forms a backbone for any data science project. As deﬁned in the
data science lifecycle (refer to Figure 6.3), diﬀerent tools are
needed for collecting the data, preparing and manipulating the
data, building machine learning models and evaluating the
performance of these models.
Figure 6.11 describes popular tools used for data ingestion
and data storage (under data collection) and data preparation,
modeling and evaluation (under data processing). Note that
only open source software option licensed under Apache
Software Foundation are described here because they are
widely used across the industry and have good open source
community support. But generally, companies use open source
or commercial tools based on their needs.
Figure 6.11: The big data technology stack
Data Collection Toolkit
As explained in the preceding section, data collection involves
ingesting data in diﬀerent formats and from diﬀerent sources.
Depending on the volume, velocity, variety and veracity of data,
diﬀerent tools can be used. For example, a number of tweets
about one topic on Twitter could be in the range of a few
thousand per second, whereas the number of transactions on a
stock exchange can be in the range of few hundred thousand
per second or even more. Depending on the high volume and
velocity of data from a stock, diﬀerent tools may be required for
ingesting and storing the data.
Broadly, data collection involves these two steps, data ingestion
and data storage:
–Data ingestion: Data ingestion involves ingesting or
importing the data from diﬀerent sources. The ingestion can
happen in batches or real time:
Batches: When data is ingested in batches, it is
imported in discrete chunks at periodic intervals of
time. The batch can run daily, weekly, or monthly
depending on the requirement (for example, sales
reporting or financial consolidation). The advantage of
batch processing is that it allows for some high level
of transformation on the data before storing.
Real time: When data is ingested in real time, it is
imported from the source with a short execution time,
providing near-instantaneous output. Real-time
ingestion does not allow complex data
transformation; therefore, it is mainly used in
processes where data is needed quickly for real-time
actions or decisions. Some examples where real-time
ingestion is required include high-frequency trading,
sentiment analysis on social media, and IoT (internet
of things) data capture.
Data Ingestion Tools
There are many open source tools available for ingesting the data in real-time and
batches. Some of these tools are the following:
Apache Kafka is a streaming platform used for handling real-time data feeds.
Apache Flume is used for efficiently collecting, aggregating, and moving bulk
streaming data.
Apache Sqoop is used for efficiently transferring data from a relational database to
Hadoop HDFS.
(HDFS is a popular data storage system used by Hadoop architecture. It is just a type
of distributed file system, or a system that stores a copy of files stored across multiple
computers.) Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apac
he.org
In cases where only data transfer is needed, then FTP can be used. The transfer can be
from the data source to the landing zone (temporary storage location) or from landing
zone to a database, data warehouse or data lake (permanent storage location).
FTP (file transfer protocol) is a network protocol used to transfer files between a client
and a server. It enables easy data transfer across the network. For more secure file
access, transfer and management, SFTP (SSH file transfer protocol) is used.
Source: The TCP/IP Guide. [Online]. Available: http://tcpipguide.com/
–Data storage: Data storage involves storing all the data in a
single storage place, which provides robustness, security,
and ﬂexibility. There are many data storage solutions over
the cloud and on-premises that can be used according to
need. Two popular ones are data warehouses and data lakes:
A data warehouse is a centralized repository that
stores data from multiple sources and transforms it
into a standard format for efficient storage, querying
and analysis. In data warehouses, data is stored in
RDBMSs (relational database management systems)
in the form of tables, in which the table
structure/schema is predefined. This ensures that the
data organization is subject to database rules to
ensure accuracy, credibility, and integrity. Due to the
data warehouses rules, bad quality data is either
rejected or treated according to special rules.
A data lake is a system that gives flexibility to store
data in any format (relational, non-relational, and so
on). The principle of data lake is “Store first, process
later,” or have single storage for all of the data that
anyone in an organization might need to analyze.
Data is kept in its raw form and transformed only
when it is ready to be used. In contrast to a data
warehouse, a data lake does not need a data table
structure/schema before storage. These applications
make data lakes an ideal choice to store all data of a
company as it does not require any business
specification before storage and saves a lot of time
and effort.
Data Lakes with Apache Hadoop HDFS
Data lakes are commonly constructed with the Hadoop architecture because Hadoop
provides a collection of open source software libraries that can efficiently store and
process big datasets. Some advantages of using HDFS:
–HDFS is better than traditional distributed file systems as it is highly fault-tolerant.
It can prevent data loss in case of system failure as a copy of files is stored across
multiple computers.
–It can store massive datasets with easy access.
–It can break down data into separate pieces and do parallel processing.
–It has a low cost compared to a traditional data storage system.
Source: Apache Hadoop. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
Data Processing Toolkit
After storing the data, the next step is to process and transform
it into a useable form for modeling. The toolkit described in this
section covers tools usually used for data preparation, modeling
and evaluation. Often data is collected from various sources, so
it is untidy. That is, it has inconsistent data types, useful
columns spread across multiple ﬁles, and other unstructured
characteristics. Data processing ensures that this data is
organized so that is easy to retrieve whenever needed. This step
is also called data transformation as it involves steps such as
changing the data types, ﬁltering, aggregating, joining or
concatenating diﬀerent datasets. The transformed datasets can
then be used to generate some meaningful insights or business
intelligence reports.
Traditionally, companies have followed an ETL (extract,
transform and load) approach, which involves performing such
transformations before loading data into the database. But
many times, the entire transformation process can be
cumbersome and signiﬁcantly reduce the volume of the data
that can be stored. With the availability of cheap and scalable
data storage, such as data lakes, companies are gradually
moving from ETL to an ELT (extract, load and transform) model
where transformation can happen after storing the data. The
advantage is that all the data can be stored ﬁrst and
transformed later according to need. However, in practice,
companies are neither completely ETL (as they need to store
more and more data) nor completely ELT (as storing entire raw
data may consume a lot of disk space which can be unnecessary
and add to the cost).
Data Processing Tools
Some of the data processing tools described here can be used for data preparation,
building machine learning models and even perform model evaluations. Data
processing for small datasets can be handled by commonly used spreadsheet tools,
but processing of bigger datasets requires tools like R, Python, SQL, Hive, Impala, and
Pig. The following are some of the commonly used data processing tools: R and
Python are open-source programming languages widely used in data science for data
processing and modeling.
SQL is a programming language widely used for querying and managing data in
relational databases. Hadoop MapReduce is a programming model in Hadoop used
for parallel processing of large datasets in a distributed manner.
Apache Hive is a data warehouse built on Hadoop for data processing,
summarization, querying, and analysis using a SQL-like language called Hive QL (HQL).
Pig is a high-level scripting language for performing data analysis on top of Hadoop.
Impala is another query engine built on top of Hadoop in which querying is faster
than Hive.
Apache Spark is a processing framework similar to but much faster than MapReduce.
It supports various tools for different purposes, such as Spark SQL for structured
datasets, Spark Streaming for data streaming, MLlib for machine learning, and Apache
Storm for real-time computation.
Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
Data Workflow Toolkit
Given the standard steps of data ingestion, data transfer, data
storage and data processing, there are two ways these processes
can be operationalized: either by manually executing these
steps, or using data workﬂows that can carry out these
processes automatically or semi-automatically. It is diﬃcult to
manually perform all of these tasks eﬃciently, accurately and
quickly every time new data is received. Therefore, data
workﬂows/pipelines are created to automate these processes.
Workflow Tools
Some of the popular open source data workflow tools include the following:
Apache Oozie is used to automate the entire data ingestion, transfer, storage, and
processing process and schedule these processes as jobs. Apache Oozie is quite useful
as it can fully integrate with the Apache Hadoop and supports Hadoop jobs for Apache
MapReduce, Pig, Hive, and Sqoop. In addition to that, complex data transformations
that need complex scheduling can be managed by creating sub-workflows.
Apache Airflow is another open source tool managing complex computational
workflows and data processing pipelines. Overall, Airflow supports connectors to most
of the cloud service providers, and it has a better UI, which can help you visualize your
pipeline’s dependencies and see how they progress.
Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
In addition to the open source solutions for the big data
technology stack, there is a mix of good commercial cloud
platform solutions (standalone or built on top of these open
source frameworks) oﬀered by leading companies. A few such
solutions are AWS (Amazon Web Services), Microsoft Azure,
and Google Cloud Platform. The advantages of using these
commercial solutions is that they can provide on-demand cloud
computing solutions with software, databases, computing
power and services on a paid subscription basis.
Challenges and Lessons from Data Science Projects
Data science is a rapidly evolving ﬁeld with continuous
research and development of new algorithms, big data and
analytics tools, and products using machine learning. Yet, many
organizations have started adopting data science only quite
recently. Due to this limited experience, there are several
challenges that companies face when they start working on
data science. These challenges can be unique to the company,
team, project or even the model, but broadly, most of the
challenges are similar across the industry (based on the
maturity of the data science practice). The following are the
typical challenges faced while working on data science projects:
–Data platform (legacy systems): Many companies that are
new to data science (but have been in existence for several
decades) have legacy systems. It is diﬃcult to connect these
legacy systems seamlessly to data lakes, for example. It is
complex to implement a new algorithm and way to feed data
back to the legacy system for operations teams that need to
use them in decision making.
–Data quality and data dictionaries: In most companies, raw
data is dirty (missing, inaccurate, duplicate, misleading, and
non-integrated), and data dictionaries are incomplete or
absent. This poses a signiﬁcant challenge to data scientists’
productivity as they need to spend a lot of time in
understanding the data and perform a lot of quality checks.
And many times incorrect data can lead to erroneous
results.
–Data privacy and lack of data access: In many projects, data
is not available, or not available on time, due to data privacy
issues. To resolve these issues, an upfront assessment of data
privacy should be done at the scoping phase itself, and
appropriate measures should be taken to address the issues.
In some cases, a project may have to discontinue due to
unresolved issues.
–Ethical Issues: Many times, data science projects involve
working with sensitive data such as race, gender, religion,
national origin, and medical history, and we should be
careful to use only data that is allowed by rules and
regulations. Some of the variables, even though allowed by
the regulations, might introduce discrimination (or
marginalize certain sections of the society). Organizations
must take extra care to ensure that algorithms do not create
discrimination and are used in ethical ways.
–Lack of project sponsorships: Many companies do not focus
on investing appropriately in data science projects. This is
due to a couple reasons:
First, data science projects usually have a high setup
cost (cost of resources and big data tools). Also,
management often does not fully understand the
potential benefits of data science project.
Second, management usually underestimates the
complexity associated with implementing a successful
experiment in business operations. A lot of projects
fail when implemented at scale in an organization
even after success during experimentation. This is due
to challenges associated with integrating data science
models with legacy systems, and due to the
complexity associated with change management, as
business processes need to be updated and teams
have to accept new ways of working.
–Expectation management: It is diﬃcult to manage
expectations about the impact of data science projects with
management. It can only provide you a limited boost in
business or reduce ineﬃciencies. Remember that data
science is not magic! The beneﬁt of a data science project
also may not immediately quantiﬁable when used to develop
a data-driven approach for business, automatic processing,
data-driven decision making for business transformation
and change management, training existing employees with
data science skills, and so forth, but can eliminate future
problems and help create a data-driven culture. This should
also be explained to management to set the right
expectations.
–Focus on wrong problems: The lack of clear direction,
unclear problem statements, and unclear execution plans
can cause data science projects to fail. For example—
building a cool product without any business utility is likely
to fail, as in cases when the product or model was created by
data geeks without involving business teams.
Conclusion
The ﬁeld of data science and big data is very broad. The aim of
this chapter was to provide a high-level overview of the data
science and big data analytics ﬁeld and explain some key
concepts. To master this ﬁeld and develop proﬁciency to apply
these learnings in the real world, one must go through further
readings and practice on real-world problems (under the
supervision of an experienced data scientist) or on open data
science competitions. Moreover, the ﬁeld is rapidly evolving
and therefore continuous learning is required to keep up to
date about the developments.
In order to gain further knowledge about this subject, the
following are some good resources:
–An Introduction to Statistical Learning with Applications in R
by Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie and Robert
Tibshirani
–Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective by Kevin
Murphy
–Machine Learning with R by Brett Lantz
–Doing Data Science by Cathy O’Neil, Rachel Schutt
–Deep Learning by Aaron Courville, Ian Goodfellow, and
Yoshua Bengio
–Mining of Massive Datasets by Jure Leskovec, Anand
Rajaraman, Jeﬀ Ullman
–Coursera online course: Machine Learning by Andrew Ng
Endnotes
1 Data source: Google Trends (https://www.google.com/trends).
2 Ng, Andrew (2018) Machine Learning Yearning—Technical Strategy for AI
Engineers in the Era of Deep Learning, Unpublished book, www.mlyearning.org
3 Linden, Greg, Smith, Brent, York, Jeremy (2003) Amazon.com “Recommendations:
Item-to-Item Collaborative Filtering, IEEE Internet Computing,” v. 7, n. 1, pp. 76–80,
January 2003. doi>10.1109/MIC.2003.1167344
4 Gomez-Uribe, Carlos A. and Hunt, Neil (2016) “The Netﬂix Recommender System:
Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation, ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems (TMIS),” v. 6, n. 4, pp. 1–19, January 2016.
5 Khandani, A. E., Kim, A. J., and Lo, A. W. (2010) “Consumer credit-risk models via
machine learning algorithms.” Journal of Banking & Finance, v 34, pp. 2767–2787.
6 Tukey, John W. (1962) “The Future of Data Analysis.” Ann. Math. Statist. v. 33, n. 1,
pp. 1–67. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177704711
7 Cleveland, William S. (2001) “Data Science: an action plan for expanding the
technical areas of the ﬁeld of statistics.” International Statistical Review, v. 69, n. 1, pp.
21–26.
8 Davenport, Thomas & J Patil, D. (2012) “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st
Century.” Harvard Business Review. v. 90, pp. 70–76, 128.
9 Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J. et al. (2011) Big data: The next frontier
for innovation, competition, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute working
paper. www.mckinsey.com
1 0 Jacobson, Ralph (2013) “2.5 quintillion bytes of data created every day. How does
CPG & Retail manage it?” (IBM, April 24, 2013) [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.co
m/blogs/insights-on-business/consumer-products/2-5-quintillion-bytes-of-datacreated-
every-day-how-does-cpg-retail-manage-it/
1 1 IBM Corporation (2016), “The Four V’s of Big Data,” 2016. [Online]. Available: htt
p://www.ibmbigdatahub.com/infographic/four-vs-bigdata
1 2 Pipino, L.L., Lee, Y.W., and Wang, R.Y. (2002) “Data quality assessment.”
Communications of the ACM, v. 45, n. 4, pp. 211–218.
1 3 Ng, Machine Learning Yearning, op.cit.
1 4 Fortmann-Roe, Scott Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoﬀ http://scott.fortma
nn-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
1 5 Ibid.
1 6 James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. (2013) An Introduction to Statistical
Learning with Applications in R, 2013, Springer Science and Business Media, New
York.
We would like to thank AXA for providing an intellectual
environment where we could devote time to write this chapter
and receive feedback and guidance from colleagues. This
chapter is written to provide a high-level introduction and
motivation to readers on data science and big data. Most of
what we discuss here has already been said in many books,
research papers, blog posts, mailing lists, and so on. The further
reading suggestions and references at the end of the chapter
are great sources if you want to learn any speciﬁc area in more
depth.
Ankur Agrawal is a seasoned actuarial, analytics professional
heading AXA Data and Tech Innovation Asia lab. Objective of the
lab is to drive AXA towards a tech-led company by leveraging
data and emerging technologies at scale which have the potential
to disrupt the current insurance business model and provide
opportunities to shape future businesses. In his last role with AXA
Business Services in India, he was a member of Exec team
responsible for managing a team of over 200+ professionals
supporting 20+ AXA entities across life, health and P&C actuarial,
data science, and research areas spanning North America,
Europe and Asia region. Prior to that, he has held various
leadership positions in actuarial areas in direct companies as
well as consulting ﬁrms across life, health and P&C actuarial,
operational areas spanning North America, Europe and Asia
region. Ankur is a qualiﬁed actuary from Institute and Faculty of
Actuaries UK and Institute of Actuaries of India and also holds a
Bachelor of Technology, Mechanical from Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi.
Siddhant Tiwari is a data science professional working as a
senior data scientist at AXA Data and Tech Innovation Asia lab.
His role at lab involves executing high-impact data science
projects for AXA entities and supporting them in their data
transformation journey. He is experienced in leading data science
projects involving opportunity assessments, customer
acquisitions, cross-selling and up-selling, product
recommendations, customer retention, risk management and
fraud. Previously, at ZS Associates, he consulted various Fortune
500 pharmaceutical clients in devising sales and marketing
strategies to improve brand positioning in the market using data
analytics. He holds a BE Hons. in Electrical and Electronics from
BITS Pilani, India and MSc. in Business Analytics from National
University of Singapore.
OceanofPDF .com