audit, tax, management accounting, and personal financial planning 
(Yang & Vasarhelyi, 1993). 
Expert systems can be classified as rules-based or fuzzy-based. 
Rules-based expert systems employ a set of detailed instructions, 
called algorithms, that apply rules to interpret how to react to various 
scenarios. For example, a tax software program may use the following 
rule: if the adjusted gross income equals X dollars, then the applicable 
federal tax is equal to Y dollars. 
Fuzzy-based expert systems use fuzzy logic – a logical system in 
which conditions cannot be described in binary terms such as true or false, 0 or 1. Fuzzy logic is useful in situations that involve imprecision 
and vagueness (Negnevitsky, 2011). For example, an algorithm using 
fuzzy logic was used in an expert system designed to assist with 
fraud detection of settled insurance claims (Pathak et al., 2005). These 
researchers also suggest that fuzzy logic expert systems could be used 
by auditors to assess control risks and detection risks on an audit 
engagement. 
Today’s machine reasoning systems go beyond the rules-based 
capabilities of ES. AI-enabled MR systems can now learn using machine learning algorithms and artificial neural networks to draw conclusions through data analysis. As a result, there are vast oppor
-
tunities for accountants to utilize MR systems to enhance productivity. 
Machine Learning 
Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI (as illustrated in Figure 1.1) 
that uses algorithms to analyze data to carry out specific tasks, such 
as making predictions, without relying on explicit programming as in 
rule-based expert systems. Machine learning uses pattern recognition and inference to learn from data. The larger the data set, the more 
examples from which the algorithm can learn through trial and error 
(CPA Canada, & AICPA, 2019). Machine learning is used by Netflix to make recommendations for TV shows and movies based on what 
the user previously viewed, thereby enhancing the user experience. 
The more content that a machine learning AI views, the more refined and accurate its predictions will be. To cite another example, 
Amazon uses machine learning to analyze purchasing data on its 
products to forecast demand, identify fraudulent purchases, and 
provide customized recommendations and promotions (Camhi & 
Pandolh, 2017). 
We have so far discussed machine learning in consumer-driven 
fields, but what does it have to offer the field of accounting? What Accountants Need to Know 7 
Since machine learning enables systems to be adaptative (Negnevitsky, 
2011), computers equipped with ML can learn from experience, re -
sulting in improved performance over time. As an example, KPMG3 
employs IBM’s machine learning algorithms to assist their clients with compliance with the IFRS 16 lease accounting standard (Samuel, 
2018). Specifically, the KPMG Contract Abstraction Tool extracts 
data from tens of thousands of contracts, each of which may be 
hundreds of pages long, and analyzes the data for compliance with the leasing standard. As the program examines more contracts, it becomes 
“smarter” and can offer more refined and targeted feedback. Markus 
Kreher, Global Head of Accounting Advisory Services and Head of Finance Advisory, KPMG in Germany, said: “We’ve effectively 
trained the solution to read and understand contracts just like an 
attorney would” (Samuel, 2018, para. 4). 
Similarly, Deloitte uses an award-winning machine learning tool 
called Argus to review, identify, and extract key accounting informa
-
tion from any type of electronic document. Argus learns from every human interaction and can analyze sales and leasing contracts, em
-
ployment agreements, invoices, meeting minutes, financial statements, and legal letters (Deloitte, 2015), eliminating a time-consuming and costly manual task normally performed by auditors. Thus, Argus 
enables Deloitte auditors to be more productive by spending their 
time interpreting results and exercising professional skepticism. 
Possible applications for ML in accounting include computers that 
learn from audit failures by analyzing data sets that were the basis for incorrectly issuing a clean audit opinion. Another application of ML could be on tax positions taken by firms that were rejected by the 
federal and state tax authorities. 
There are four main types of machine learning: supervised, 
unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforced. 
Supervised Learning 
Supervised learning is a process in which a computer algorithm 
learns from a set of training data that is labeled (tagged with certain 
attributes such as poor credit or good credit) and paired as input 
and output variables (X results in Y). Supervised learning is often 
used for classification (e.g., identifying fraudulent and non-fraudulent transactions) and prediction (e.g., predicting the number of un
-
collectible accounts based on the aging of individual customers). For example, suppose an auditor wants to predict the number 
of uncollectible accounts based on the aging of customer balances. 8 What Accountants Need to Know 
A developer would provide the model with historical data that includes 
the input variable (aging of individual customers) and the output 
data (amount of uncollectible accounts written off ). A supervised ML 
model would then “learn” the rules based on the historical data and 
then predict the amount of uncollectible accounts when new aging data is provided. 
Unsupervised Learning 
Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, is a process in which the 
computer algorithm only learns from unlabeled input data (i.e., the 
outputs are unknown). For example, consider a controller of an 
accounting department who wants to better understand why customers 
do not pay within 30 days. An unsupervised machine learning model 
would teach the algorithm to identify trends and patterns related 
to the input data. The algorithm might identify that customers with 
outstanding accounts receivable balances over 120 days might have similar zip codes, income levels, or credit scores. One of the most 
common approaches for unsupervised learning is cluster analysis, 
whereby input data is grouped based on similarities. 
Semi-supervised Learning 
Semi-supervised learning is a hybrid of supervised and unsupervised 
learning using both labeled and unlabeled data during the training 
process. As many real-world data sets often contain incorrect or 
missing labels (Yao et al., 2018), using a semi-supervised approach 
could lead to improved learning compared to a purely supervised 
or unsupervised method. 
Reinforcement Learning 
Reinforcement learning is a process in which a computer algorithm 
trains itself, learning from data through trial and error. The agent is 
rewarded for performing specific tasks correctly and penalized for performing tasks incorrectly. These algorithms are designed to 
maximize rewards and minimize penalties. 
Deep Learning 
Deep learning (DL) is a subset of machine learning (as illustrated in 
Figure 1.1) that uses artificial neural networks to discover patterns What Accountants Need to Know 9 
from data. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a collection of arti -
ficial neurons (also known as units) that receive data as an input, and 
then logic is applied to produce an output. ANNs are frequently used 
for pattern recognition such as facial recognition in pictures and vi -
deos, speech recognition, social networks, etc., frequently accelerated 
by tensor processing. A tensor processing unit (TPU) is an application- 
specific circuit developed by Google that is used to increase processing speeds for machine learning and deep learning applications. Whereas traditional machine learning relies heavily on the guidance provided by 
human programmers, DL models use ANNs (inspired by the biolo
-
gical neural networks found in human brains) to analyze large volumes 
of data to teach itself. 
Deep learning can be used in a variety of applications, such as facial 
recognition, image classification, speech recognition, and text transla -
tion. Current applications of DL include self-driving vehicles that slow 
down as it approaches a pedestrian cross-walk, ATM machines that 
reject a counterfeit banknote, and a smartphone app that translates the image of a street sign in a foreign language (The Mathworks & 
MATLAB, 2018). 
EY uses deep learning technology to reconstruct documents (e.g., 
invoices and contracts used during an audit) that were poorly- scanned using optical recognition software (Duffy, 2019). Researcher 
Sophia Sun (2019) promotes the use of DL to support audit decision making in two key areas: information identification and judgment 
support. DL algorithms can analyze semi-structured data (e.g., text 
data from supporting documents such as invoices, contracts, etc.) 
and unstructured data (such as images, audio, and video from the 
internet, social media, etc.), which will aid in information identifi
-
cation. Further, Sun notes that the predictive performance of DL 
models is superior to classic machine learning when the volume of 
data and the number of variables is large. To maximize the use of DL 
in an audit context, Sun suggests designing and developing a data warehouse to train the algorithms to make predictions and assist 
with audit procedures. 
Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of AI that focuses on 
the interaction of computers and people using human languages. The 
Siri application on Apple’s iPhone and Amazon’s Alexa uses NLP to 
understand requests for completing a task. 10 What Accountants Need to Know 
NLP can be broken down into two types: natural language under -
standing and natural language generation. 
Natural language understanding (NLU) enables computers to un -
derstand instructions provided in human language. For example, when 
a user asks their iPhone for weather conditions by using the following voice command, “Hey Siri, what’s the latest weather?” Siri under
-
stands their command and retrieves the information by searching on the Internet. 
Natural language generation (NLG) enables computers to produce 
human language so that people can understand computers. After Siri performed a search of the latest weather, it replies with an answer such 
as the following example: “it’s currently clear and 28 degrees in 
Philadelphia. Expect partly cloudy skies starting tonight. Today’s high 
will be 33 degrees, and the low will be 23 degrees”. Siri understood that 
the user was asking it to look up the weather conditions at a specific 
location and time, and then returned the results in spoken English 
words. NLG can also convert data visualizations, such as charts and graphs, into a verbal description that can be understood by humans 
(CPA Canada & AICPA, 2019). 
The potential for using NLP in accounting is substantial, as it 
can be used to process and analyze large amounts of data. NLP has been used to analyze various textual documents related to corpo
-
rate financial performance and compliance with accounting stan -
dards and regulations (Fisher et al., 2016). Text mining uses NLP to extract meaning from textual data. Applications of NLP include 
text mining components such as semantics analysis, text classifi
-
cation, text summarization, and text translation. Additional ap -
plications include speech recognition, question-answering systems, and chatbots. 
Data Mining 
Data mining is a process of analyzing large data sets (i.e., “big data”) 
to discover previously unknown patterns or relationships. Data mining 
tools are typically applied to structured data, that is, highly formatted 
data contained in relational databases such as in an ERP system and, 
therefore, can be very helpful for accountants. 
As illustrated in Figure 1.2, data mining intersects with but is not 
considered a subfield of AI. As computer scientist Xavier Amatriain notes, “machine learning can be used for data. However, data mining can use 
other techniques on top of machine learning” (Amatriain, 2016, para. 5). What Accountants Need to Know 11 
