10-0
C H A PT E R 10
Recent Data and 
Analyses Developments 
in Accounting
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Recent Data Developments
Recent Analyses Developments
Chapter Preview
This chapter reviews a variety of new data and analysis technologies that can add value and 
create opportunities for your professional work. These opportunities are limited only by your 
interest, creativity, and initiative. In fact, new data sources and analysis technologies are 
improving every step of the data analysis process.
Professional Insight: What Opportunities do Data and Analyses 
Developments Offer?
Neo recently finished his internship in a financial institution and summarized his introduction 
to the endless possibilities and opportunities available by pursuing a career in accounting.
I discovered a passion for combining accounting and finance data during my intern-
ship. By analyzing accounting information trends, I could help define my client’s cap-
ital needs and find the lowest cost capital sources. I used diverse data sources and 
complex analyses to describe and predict my clients’ financial value, cash flows, 
and capital needs to help me prescribe the best capital source alternatives.
I loved developing models to predict my client’s cash needs and prescribe the sources 
and costs associated with their capital sourcing options. For example, I helped one cli-
ent decide whether to extend ownership or borrow funds with prediction models. Ana-
lyzing their cash flows revealed they could afford to leverage more debt. I created my 
models from data from the accounting system, financial statements, electronic 
contracts, such as leases and loans, and company-related social media posts, 
using both structured and unstructured data.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-1
These experiences fostered the creative skills necessary to build models that measure 
future performance and economic valuation, whether the client is a public, private, 
nonprofit, or government organization. I feel that my work had purpose because I 
was helping clients find opportunities to increase their sustainable competitive 
­advantages. That sense of purpose has reinforced my choice to study accounting.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 10.1   Describe data trends 
impacting the accounting 
profession.
•	 Data Volume
•	 Data Variety
•	 Data Velocity
•	 Data Veracity
•	 Data Value
•	 Data Ethics
Identify Data Characteristics
(Example: Managerial 
Accounting)
 LO 10.2   Explain how technology 
developments are impacting 
data analysis in accounting.
•	 Value Creation
•	 Data Mining and Smart Contracts
•	 Process Automation and Process Mining
•	 Continuous Auditing
•	 Textual Analysis
•	 Cognitive Technologies
Use Process Automation 
to Analyze Financial 
Statements
(Example: Financial 
Accounting)
 LO 10.3   Demonstrate how data 
and technology developments 
are adding value to professional 
practice.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing
•	 Financial Accounting
•	 Managerial Accounting
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Professional Practice 
Areas to Analyses and 
Technologies
10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting 
Accounting Practice?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Describe data trends impacting the accounting profession.
More data from new and diverse sources are available every day. Consider the online course 
management platforms used by college students around the world. These learning man-
agement systems can track each selection a student makes during online learning. If your 
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform.

10-2
CHAPTER 10 Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
objective is to do well in a course, then this data can be analyzed to provide valuable feedback 
about which concepts you still need to master so you can focus on learning them. 
 Accountants are also encountering new data options and characteristics from sources 
both internal and external to their organizations. Whether that data is valuable depends on 
their objectives. If the objective is improving tax planning, then internet chatter data about 
upcoming tax policy changes could be valuable. Of course, this same chatter may not be valu-
able if the objective is to evaluate shipping costs for the year. 
 As accountants perform analyses using more data and increasingly powerful computers 
and analysis tools, they must consider how increases in data volume, variety, velocity, and 
veracity add value to their analyses. Illustration 10.1 defines these five data characteristics 
and provides examples in each professional practice area. 
V
V
V
V
V
Value
Volume
Size of
Data Set
Data Set
Structures
Data
Creation Rate
Data
Integrity
Veracity
Velocity
Variety
The Five
V’s of Data
Potential for
Incremental
Intelligence
 ILLUSTRATION 10.1  The Five Data “Vs” 
Characteristic
Examples
Volume
In AIS:
• Process flow logs
• Security alerts
• System error logs
• Transactions
• Firewall traffic
• System and application access logs
Variety
In auditing:
• Codes, approval stamps, text, 
pictures, dates, and recorded 
values
• Fair market values at year end
Velocity
In financial accounting:
• Cash transactions
• Stock price changes
• Social media content
Veracity
In managerial accounting:
• Transactions
• Prices and costs
• Vendor and customer data
• Sensor data from smart machines
Value
In tax accounting:
• Local, national, and international 
tax changes
• Sales tax jurisdictions and rates
This section covers the impact of each data characteristic on accounting data analytics, 
then explains the ethical implications accountants consider throughout the data analysis 
process stages.
 Data Volume
 Imagine if the number of clothes in your closet grew exponentially each year. Depending on 
your closet’s size, you might run out of storage space and struggle to locate the items you need 
when you need them. Adding storage space and proper organization could cost you both time 
and resources. 
 Accountants are experiencing similar increases in data, which is leading to more data 
storage and organization costs and more data strategy options.  Data volume refers to the 
amount of data selected for an analysis project. Data volume is typically limited by the com-
puter and analysis tool  capacities required for the data analyses. 

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-3
Increases in Data Volume
Business operating cycles in large organizations are currently capturing and storing millions 
of sales, ­purchases, receipts, and payments each day, in addition to email, social media, and 
internet traffic content. Organizations are also storing more data than ever before. In fact, 
experts believe the volume of data produced by organizations will continue to increase expo-
nentially in the next decade (Illustration 10.2).
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2020
2025
Years
Times increased
based on 2020
Volume of Organizational Data
2030
2035
ILLUSTRATION 10.2  Organizations are Producing More Data
Two factors are contributing to this:
	 1.	 Technologies that are connecting and integrating data from traditionally separate sys-
tems, such as the AIS, internet content, and smart device sensors.
	 2.	 Decreasing computer costs and increasing computer memory and processing capabilities 
make it easier for organizations to capture, store, and analyze more data.
Of course, with more data comes more costs. Businesses need more computer hardware and 
software capacity, data privacy, security expertise, and internal controls. To address these 
challenges, organizations are turning to new solutions for storing and processing their large 
data sets.
Developments in Data Storage
A popular solution for storing high data volume are cloud data services. Cloud data ser-
vices provide secure data storage on large servers, using the organization’s own resources or 
resources provided by third parties. You might be familiar with some of the data clouds used 
by college students, such as Google Drive, Microsoft’s OneDrive, pCloud, sync.com, mega.io, 
and box.com. What are the benefits of cloud data services? Benefits include:
•	Easily expandable data storage capacities.
•	Expert data management.
•	Secure data, hardware, and software.
•	IT expertise and advice.
There are three types of cloud data services. The key difference between them is if and how the 
cloud service provider’s servers are shared: 
•	Private clouds are restricted access data storage centers created for the data of one orga-
nization or shared between an agreed upon set of companies. Private shared clouds often 
include a single large company, a group of supply chain partners, or non-competing inde-
pendent companies from different industries. Private clouds, provided by third parties 
such as HP Enterprise, VMWare, Microsoft, Cisco, and Amazon, are the fastest growing 
cloud sector.

10-4 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
•	Public clouds securely store data from multiple companies on shared servers using vir-
tual server data separators. Leading public cloud service vendors include Google Cloud 
Platform, Amazon Web Services (AWS), and Microsoft Azure.
•	Hybrid clouds offer both private and public cloud data storage, serving the needs of the 
security and use characteristics of the data involved. Amazon and Microsoft are two lead-
ing vendors providing hybrid cloud solutions.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.1: Evaluate Cloud Data 
Services
Use critical thinking when deciding which data cloud type best serves your data needs by 
researching prices and services offered by viable data cloud vendors (Knowledge).
The best data cloud can also be selected by considering the following factors (Alternatives):
•	 The volume of data you need to store.
•	 How often and how much of the data needs to be added, modified, and retrieved.
•	 Data privacy and data security requirements.
•	 Your budget for cloud data services.
•	 The reputation of the vendor.
While organizations might prefer to store their data in private clouds, both private and public 
shared cloud services can provide significant cost savings. Think of it as living in a building 
with several separate apartments. Some people might prefer to live in a house by themselves, 
but a shared structure often means saving money on housing costs. Illustration 10.3 summa-
rizes the typical benefits and costs of each type of data cloud.
ILLUSTRATION 10.3  Comparing Cloud Data Services
Data Cloud
Benefits
Costs
Private Clouds
Data storage for a single 
organization.
•	 Offers high data privacy and data 
security.
•	 Offers high data interactivity.
•	 More customization and 
adaptability are possible.
•	 Can be the most expensive 
option.
•	 May be difficult to manage 
if developed in-house 
without hiring staff with 
cloud expertise.
Data storage that is shared 
by a set group of non-
competing organizations.
•	 All the benefits of single 
organization storage, especially 
for data interactivity between 
supply chain partners.
•	 Sharing data storage makes it a 
less expensive option for each 
company.
•	 Can have some restrictions 
on customization and 
adaptability.
•	 May involve shared 
contracts and joint revisions.
Public Clouds
Public clouds are shared 
by many organizations 
who can easily come and 
go from the public cloud.
•	 Lowest individual company cost.
•	 Fastest implementation.
•	 Most appropriate for small 
businesses.
Least adaptable or 
customizable cloud data 
service.
Hybrid Clouds
Include both private and 
public cloud virtual server 
sections.
The benefits and costs associated with both private and public clouds 
also apply to hybrid clouds. Hybrid clouds allow organizations to 
choose which data subset is best stored in a private cloud, while 
storing the rest in a public cloud for the cost efficiencies.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-5
Some vendors of cloud data services also offer cloud computing services, providing the 
software computing power that is often needed when organizations process and analyze large 
volumes of data. A recent market strategy pivot is the movement of high tech and internet ser-
vice companies towards also providing private and public cloud data and computing services, 
leveraging their existing data storage, processing, and security service reputations.
Data Variety
Data variety refers to the diversity of data structures and measurement scales in the data 
we want to analyze. Let’s return to the wardrobe example. We can describe our clothes with a 
variety of structured data fields: categorical scale fields such as color and type (shirts, shoes, 
etc.), ordinal scale fields such as size, interval scale fields such as how long we have owned the 
garment, or ratio scale fields such as how much it originally cost.
Accountants have traditionally selected and analyzed structured data that are easily rep-
resented in rows and columns, such as categorical account codes, interval transaction dates, 
and ratio values for the transaction amounts and account balances. Recently, accountants are 
combining structured data with unstructured data, including text, smart device sensor read-
ings, and pictures and graphics, to increase the value created from their analyses.
Illustration 10.4 provides examples of unstructured data that can be combined with 
traditional transaction data from customer orders, inventory, shipments, invoices, and 
collections.
ILLUSTRATION 10.4  Analyzing the Sales Function: The Impact of Data Variety
Traditional Data Used
in Sales Analysis
Enhanced with
New Data Options 
Sales Orders
Shipments
Invoices
Collections by Inventory Product
Customers
Salespersons
Stores or Regions
Budgeted Versus Actual Sales
Online Customer Reviews
and Comments
Weather Patterns
GPS Locations
Population Demographics
Targeted Promotions
Purchases Quality
+
Valuable business intelligence can be created by combining unstructured data with tradi-
tional structured data for analysis:
•	Shipping truck GPS data can be integrated with AIS data to find the most efficient deliv-
ery routes, reducing truck wear and tear by reducing mileage driven, reducing fuel costs, 
and improving delivery time.
•	Integrating weather data with sales transaction data to anticipate customer traffic pat-
terns and allow for better service.
•	Combining customer reviews with inventory turnover to assess vendor and product 
effectiveness.
•	Integrating GPA mapping data with cell phone location data can evaluate or develop tar-
geted advertising campaigns or for marketing intelligence about future products.

10-6 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Data Velocity
Most of us have experienced how rapidly information moves through social media plat-
forms such as Instagram and Twitter. Data velocity refers to the speed with which new 
data points are generated. The higher the data velocity, the faster data volume grows 
(Illustration 10.5).
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.2: Consider the Impact 
of Data Variety on Data Strategy
As the variety of available data and how they are combined increase, the success of your 
data and analysis strategies can be improved by selecting an analysis that is appropriate 
for your data’s measurement scales. One option is transforming unstructured data into 
structured data scales to increase your analysis options. For example, categorizing text 
comments as “positive” or “negative” transforms unstructured text fields into structured 
categorical data which better addresses the needs of marketing and sales managers. 
These two categories can be tested for correlation with other data, such as delays in ship-
ments, to better understand how to best serve the stakeholder providing the comment. 
(Stakeholders, Purpose)
14 trillion cash transactions
400 billion sales and purchases
100 billion business emails
5 billion Google searches
1 billion credit card transactions 
450 million Facebook posts
9 million Instagram posts
400 thousand bitcoin transactions 
The following activities occur
in an average weekday:
ILLUSTRATION 10.5  Data Velocity Continues to Increase
Accountants now regularly use high velocity data. Internal high velocity data can come 
from various sources:
•	Equipment like HVAC (heating, venting, and air conditioning) and smart sensing and 
controlling devices for cost and quality control purposes.
•	Business process tags indicating throughput progress for operational control.
•	Tags on confidential data and sensitive word use for communications originating inside 
the organization to manage legal and market risk.
High velocity data can also come from external sources:
•	Mobile device location alerts indicating when customers are nearby for targeted 
advertising.
•	Location, traffic, weather, and construction alerts for employees operating delivery or 
service trucks to optimize routes and service.
•	Tags on sensitive words in tweets, posts, texts, emails, and blogs that originate outside the 
organization to identify legal risks and market intelligence.
•	Weather and geographic map data for sales forecasting and transport safety.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-7
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.3: Tips for Using High 
Velocity Data
While there are many tweets on Twitter every day, frequently only some are relevant to the 
purpose of an analysis:
•	 A common tool for evaluating high velocity data as they are generated is using an “if, then” 
condition and only storing the data that pass the specific condition. For example, if a tweet 
mentions your company’s name, then that tweet will be stored (Purpose).
•	 The value of high velocity data can be short-lived. The same “if, then” filters that identify which 
data have value can also be used for data purging when that value expires. Being alerted that 
there may be hail in the next hour can protect assets from hail damage, but hail alerts from 
yesterday will not protect assets today. (However, this data could still be valuable to insurance 
companies who are estimating future monthly hail damage claims) (Risks).
Data velocity is also related to the terms big data and internet of things. Coined in 1987 to 
help market new computing systems, big data refers to how high data velocity can quickly 
increase data volume. When traditional AIS data is integrated with high velocity data from 
smart devices, the resulting high variety data set is sometimes called the internet of things. 
Many technological advances, including the cloud data services discussed earlier, have been 
developed to provide solutions for the challenges experienced in storing and processing high 
volume, high variety, and high velocity data.
Data Veracity
We often rely on data to help improve our decisions. Sometimes the data needs to be accurate 
for our objective, and other times data just needs to provide general direction. A weather 
forecast does not have to be exactly accurate to help us dress appropriately. Alternatively, 
an assignment due date or an invoice due date must be precise to ensure we complete the 
assigned work or pay the invoice on time.
Accountants need reliable data from trusted sources to make professional judgments and 
decisions. Data veracity refers to the reliability, or the integrity of the data we select for anal-
ysis. Data veracity depends upon three things:
	 1.	 Whether the data will likely provide insights for the analysis objective, either by itself or 
as a component in an information model, such as a net income calculation.
	 2.	 How accurate the data must be to generate useful insights for the objective.
	 3.	 How complete the data must be to generate useful insights for the objective.
Data veracity is often considered when ranking data and analysis strategy alternatives. Assume 
the objective is to learn whether prior customers become repeat customers or if they purchase 
from competitors instead. One data alternative might be analyzing the content of customers’ 
related social media postings. Another choice is analyzing the last two years of sales data:
•	Social media postings, when authentic, describe current or past customer experience sat-
isfaction (or lack thereof), and may reveal if they are purchasing from competitors. The 
postings do not directly measure whether they would choose to be repeat customers in 
the future.
•	Past sales data probably have higher data integrity and better identify prior repeat cus-
tomers. We do not know if prior choices predict future choices or if customers are pur-
chasing from competitors.

10-8 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Data Value
Data value refers to the benefits the data provides given the analysis’ objective. Our clothes 
have a different value depending on the day’s agenda. Professional attire is worth more when 
we have an interview, go into the office, or visit clients. Lounge wear, on the other hand, is 
more valuable when working remotely from home or enjoying personal time. Accountants’ 
judgments regarding data value depend on the project’s objective:
•	If the objective is to describe profits or evaluate profit trends, then revenue and expense 
data are valuable data.
•	When diagnosing the causes of decreasing operating cash flows, then data from the cur-
rent asset and current liability accounts are valuable.
•	If the objective is to predict bankruptcy risk, then liquidity and solvency data, such as a 
company’s cash flows and all liabilities, would have data value.
•	When prescribing asset utilization strategies, market data informing about future reve-
nues and expenses have data value.
Let’s illustrate data value with a managerial accounting example. Assume you work for a 
company that manufactures and sells a variety of computer keyboard product lines. You are 
considering dropping a product line because it is operating at a negative net income. Data 
that allows separating traceable fixed expenses from common allocated fixed expenses would 
make it possible to calculate segment contribution margin in addition to the product line net 
income (Illustration 10.6).  ( Data   See How To 10.1 at the end of the chapter to learn how 
to create a comparative income statement in Excel, and then learn how to use an automated 
process to create it in How To 10.2).
How To
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.4: Evaluate Data 
Veracity
Accurately evaluating data veracity helps you select the best data and analysis strategies and 
better interpret the results. Your biases, assumptions, and self-interests, or those of others who 
selected or analyzed the data, may impact how you judge the data’s veracity: (Risks):
•	 Data veracity can be over-rated by the person selecting, preparing, and analyzing the data, as 
most people defend their own choices.
•	Data veracity can also be under-rated when the data or results conflict with what is believed 
or expected about the phenomena, and when you do not know what, if any, controls were 
used when the data was selected, prepared, or analyzed. For example, if you expected sales 
revenues to increase, you may discount data which challenges your expectation.
ILLUSTRATION 10.6  Comparing Data Value of Net Income and Segment Margin
Income Statement
Product A
Product B
Both
Product Lines
Only
Product A
Sales Revenues
$720,000
$1,200,000
$1,920,000
720,000
less Variable Costs
432,000
960,000
1,392,000
432,000
= Contribution Margin
288,000
240,000
528,000
288,000
− Avoidable Fixed 
  Expenses
 
210,000
 
225,000
 
435,000
 
210,000
= Segment Margin
78,000
15,000
93,000
78,000
− Unavoidable Common 
  Fixed Expenses
 
42,000
 
42,000
 
84,000
 
84,000
= Net Income
$  36,000
$   (27,000)
$       9,000
$  (6,000)

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-9
Segment margin provides incremental intelligence value over the net income measure. 
This is because if the segment margin result is positive, then that product line of computer 
keyboards is generating wealth to cover the common fixed expenses. The final column in 
Illustration 10.6 shows that if Product B is dropped, the company would lose the $ 15,000 of 
segment margin generated by Product B and would make a loss ($ 6,000). This example shows 
that the separation of traceable and common fixed expense data has high data veracity.
Economists often measure the value of data by whether it is likely to confirm or change 
expectations about an objective’s phenomena, (e.g., the net income or the segment margin) or 
by how it reduces uncertainty about the phenomena (e.g., the dispersion of the data points). 
In fact, data value is often not fully understood until analysis hypotheses are tested and the 
results of the analysis are available. 
Data Ethics
Using personally identifiable data can raise ethical issues for individuals and organizations. 
On  a daily basis, accountants interact with the personal and  confidential data of clients, 
employees, customers, investors, and creditors. These stakeholders rely on accountants’ 
­professional ethics to make judgments and communicate information while protecting their 
privacy and maintaining the confidentiality of their data. Unintentional and intentional 
­personal data violations can occur in various ways:
•	Collecting and sharing more than the minimally needed private data without explicit 
consent.
•	Failing to provide easy and clear opt-in and opt-out consent for data collection, sharing, 
and deletion (pre-checked boxes on websites do not provide explicit consent).
•	Limiting access or opportunities for those who opt-out of sharing their personal data.
•	Inadequate data access controls, such as encryption, which lead to access violations.
Many specific types of data, such as personally identifiable information, client financial 
records, employee pay and health records, and a company’s future strategic plans, are pro-
tected by laws and regulations.
Privacy Laws
Illustration 10.7 summarizes the leading data privacy laws in the United States.
ILLUSTRATION 10.7  U.S. Data Privacy Laws
Law
Description
The Privacy Act of 1974
Restricts use of data held by government 
agencies.
Health Information Privacy Protection Act of 
2013 and the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
Restricts the sharing of individual’s health 
care data, with fines up to $10,000 per 
violation.
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)
Limits and protects the credit-related personal 
data collected and shared.
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA)
Protects the privacy of educational records.
The Gramm-Leach Bliley Act (GLBA)
Requires loan and investment service 
providers to disclose personal data sharing.
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA) and Patriot Acts
Restricts when and how individuals’ private 
data communications can be legally surveilled.
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(COPPA)
Restricts personal data collected from minors 
and extends to third parties’ data use.

10-10 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
U.S. states are also passing their own data privacy laws at varying speeds:
•	California, Illinois, and Colorado were the first states to pass comprehensive consumer 
data privacy laws.
•	Other states, such as Massachusetts, New York, Hawaii, Maryland, and North Dakota, are 
moving forward with both partial and comprehensive data privacy law proposals that are 
currently in committee at their state legislatures.
The progress of these laws can be tracked on websites such as the International Association 
of Privacy Professionals. To help accountants navigate this data privacy landscape, there are 
ethical standards, privacy policies, and codes of conduct.
Ethical Standards and Privacy Policies
Ethical standards for using personal data assume that accountants will stay current with the 
relevant data privacy laws and regulations. Inappropriately sharing a client’s confidential con-
tact information, financial status, or tax liability can result in losing client trust and a damaged 
professional reputation. Some data privacy infractions may have much more serious conse-
quences, such as losing professional licenses or other sanctions:
•	The Institute of Management Accountants’ (IMA) ethical standards require manage-
rial accountants to act with competence, confidentiality, integrity, and credibility when 
interacting with their organization’s data, particularly the personally identifiable data of 
employees and customers.
•	The Association of International Certified Professional Accountants (AICPA) has 
similar due care ethical standards for CPAs using private and confidential data. CPAs 
also have ethics requirements about their objectivity and avoiding conflicts of interest.
•	Tax accountants, whether certified or not, must abide by the strict data confidentiality 
requirements of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The IRS code sections 6013 and 7213 
require tax accountants and IRS employees to maintain an individual’s tax return data 
privacy and security. Violations risk misdemeanor charges, fines up to $5,000, and impris-
onment up to five years per infraction.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.5: Learn About Data Laws 
and Regulations
Accountants must know the cultural, legal, regulatory, and transparency expectations for the 
collection, storage, and uses of personal data, both in the United States and globally. For exam-
ple, if your company is expanding to the European Union, then per the GDP you must offer 
those customers the ability to opt out of having their private information stored after a sales 
transaction is fulfilled. You can find some of the current laws and regulation at the following 
sources (Knowledge):
•	 The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
•	 Center for Internet Security’s critical security controls
•	 NIST Critical Infrastructure Security Framework
•	 National Conference of State Legislatures’ Security Breach Notification Laws
Ethics and the Effects of Data Velocity and Volume
Whenever you activate your navigation app’s location feature, either in your vehicle or cell 
phone, any data partner of that navigation app can access your location and movements 
throughout the day. This example of high data velocity and volume highlights new complex­
ities when developing and maintaining compliant data privacy and security systems.
Data privacy is especially an issue for accountants when using internet browsers to access 
clients’ or organizations’ private data. A single website visit can place tracking cookies, as well 
as many third-party cookies, on our computers. If not immediately removed, these cookies 
can capture data retrieved from future website pages, username and password keystrokes, and 
cursor movements.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-11
In the United States it is legal for apps or cookies running in a browser’s background to 
collect, use, and share data without explicit permission if the information collected does not 
include individual user identifiers and is not used for identity theft. However, the risk of per-
sonal data being gathered exists. An easy and cost-free preventative control for this is to go into 
the browser settings and clear stored cookies (also known as clearing the browsing history) at 
the beginning and end of every browser session. Of course, the most secure solution is access-
ing private data from within the security of a virtual private network.
Considering data volume, variety, veracity, velocity, value, and ethics within the context 
of your analyses’ objectives can help you make the best choices when designing data and 
analysis strategies. Next, let’s learn about the power we can harness from recent technological 
developments in analysis tools.
Apply It 10.1
Identify Data 
Characteristics
Managerial Accounting   You an accountant for Limitless Outdoor, a leading outdoor gear com-
pany. The objective of your data analysis project is to learn more about your company’s sales and 
product quality from last year. For each data field, indicate which data characteristics best describe it. 
(More than one data characteristic can be used to describe a data field.) 
Data Field
Data Characteristic
Sleeping bag fabric durability rating from quality testing.
Sales revenues from repeat customers and new customers during 
the last 12 months.
Cell phone data captured from bicycle rides using a navigation app.
Variability of manufacturing equipment performance every  
five minutes during use.
Naturally occurring bundles of camping equipment and outdoor 
clothing sales each month.
Hourly outside temperatures during weekend days when most 
customers are using the equipment.
Customer comments about their outdoor product satisfaction on 
social media platforms.
SOLUTION
Data Field
Data Characteristic
Sleeping bag fabric durability rating from quality testing.
Value
Sales revenues from repeat customers compared to new 
customers during the last 12 months.
Veracity and value
Cell phone data captured from bicycle rides using a navigation 
app.
Volume and variety
Variability of manufacturing equipment performance every  
five minutes during use.
Volume
Naturally occurring bundles of camping equipment and outdoor 
clothing sales each month.
Value
Hourly outside temperatures during weekend days when most 
customers are using the equipment.
Volume
Customer comments about their outdoor product satisfaction on 
social media platforms.
Variety and volume
(This is a suggested solution; other relevant insights might also be correct.)

10-12 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments 
are Accountants Adopting?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➋
Explain how technology developments are impacting data analysis in accounting.
Accountants can efficiently analyze more data than ever before by using established analysis 
tools such as Excel, as well as recently developed tools powerful enough to process a variety 
of data and at higher volume. In addition to tremendous analysis power, these tools have 
advanced visualization features that are improving how accountants analyze, interpret, and 
communicate analysis results.
Accountants often perform data analysis to prepare and verify appropriate recording of 
transactions and reporting of business operations and financial position. They are now also 
performing more data analysis to generate valuable business advice and professional judg-
ments for their internal and external stakeholders. Several leading technologies are making 
this possible.
Value Creation
Accountants have a unique competitive advantage for creating value for their stakeholders 
since their perspectives integrate knowledge across disciplines. Thoughtful data analyses can 
help improve resources and processes to increase operational competitiveness and achieve 
financial objectives (Illustration 10.8).
ILLUSTRATION 10.8  The Data Analysis Value Creation Chain
Value
Creation
Data
Analysis
New
Intelligence
Strategy
Shifs
These opportunities have led to changes in how professional accounting organizations 
and businesses present themselves:
•	The Association of International CPAs (AICPA) and the Institute of Management Accoun-
tants (IMA) have recently rebranded how their members serve their organizations and 
society. They have declared that their primary purpose is to create value for stakeholders, 
which include investors, creditors, customers, suppliers, regulators, and management 
and employees.
•	Similarly, the large international accounting firm PwC recently moved away from the tra-
ditional compliance-facing labels of tax accountant and auditor. PwC’s operations in the 
United States have been reorganized to combine the traditional audit and tax regulatory 
expertise services into “Trust Solutions.” PwC has further rebranded their professionals 
as transparent, trusted business advisors focused on creating value through recommend-
ing sustainable growth outcomes for their clients and the world.
Accounting firms large and small are quickly changing their business models to present 
themselves as expert advisors who create value by performing data analyses to improve gov-
ernance, operations, and compliance strategies for their clients. By following recommenda-
tions for better resource allocations and process improvements, organizations can improve 

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-13
access to capital, trading partners, and performance. For example, data analytics that reveal 
which product or service revenues are most associated with net income increases can grow 
both the client’s and the public’s trust in accountants’ expertise and opinions.
Let’s use a university example to illustrate how recent developments in data analy-
sis have impacted value creation. Historically, faculty at institutions of higher education 
have evaluated internal student performance data to gain insights into how to improve their 
instruction. Access to new data options and analysis tools now allow colleges to analyze 
data from external stakeholders such as alumni, recruiters, advisory boards, and profes-
sional associations to learn which skills and knowledge are demanded by the profession 
(Illustration 10.9).
ILLUSTRATION 10.9  Accounting Knowledge and Skills Demanded  
by Recruiters and Professional Association Standards
Critical
thinking
A skeptical
perspective
Professional
communication,
including
social media
Listening and
observation
Data 
and analysis
skills
Problem-solving
Evaluating
Evidence
Technical
agility
Skills
Demanded
by
Recruiters
Accounting programs can now analyze a variety of valuable data from alumni and 
recruiter surveys, interviews, and high volume and velocity data from social media platforms, 
such as LinkedIn and Facebook, to create courses that produce successful graduates. They can 
also evaluate an accounting program’s effectiveness by external metrics, such as how many 
internships turned into full time post-graduation job offers and by measuring how long it 
takes alumni to be promoted after graduation.
Similarly, accounting professionals are using more types of data and newer analysis tools 
to create value:
•	Data mining tools and electronic contracts for revenue recognition and lease accounting.
•	Routine process automation and process mining tools for improvements in process effi-
ciency and control.
•	Continuous auditing processes to reduce audit risk and improve audit quality.
•	Textual analysis for insights from language used to describe accounting and business out-
comes and predictions.
•	Cognitive technologies using artificial intelligence modeling to predict and classify 
phenomena.

10-14 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
These tools improve the efficiency and productivity of accountants. Regained worktime can 
be repurposed for more activities that add value, such as finding service opportunities and 
interpreting and communicating analysis results to stakeholders.
Data Mining and Smart Contracts
Some may know from personal experience that food sensitivity symptoms are easily diag-
nosed. However, the process of identifying which food(s) are associated with which symptoms 
can require disciplined testing over time. Health professionals often advise eliminating the 
most likely food sensitivity culprits, and systematically, over weeks and months, adding each 
back into the diet to identify specific food allergies.
Similar to the trial and error method of food allergy identification, data mining helps 
accountants systematically understand and test hypotheses while reducing some of the labor 
involved with data analysis. Additionally, smart contract software solutions allow business 
contracts to be securely negotiated, settled, and signed online in a fraction of the traditional 
time.
Data Mining
Increasingly sophisticated data mining tools are better able to handle the recent increases in 
data volume and data variety. These tools quickly diagnose errors and issues in the accounting 
data during the data preparation and exploration steps in the analysis stage. Data mining is also 
used to improve and defend management’s estimations, assumptions, decisions, and assertions. 
Data mining is the systematic practice of looking for issues or patterns occurring within 
or between data fields. Data mining lets us better understand data behavior and test expecta-
tions about data values, patterns, or relationships. The intelligence gained by data mining can 
lead to valuable operational changes:
•	AIS accountants, IT auditors, and application programmers typically mine their data to 
find system delays or errors to identify where new policies, controls, or technologies can 
improve operations.
•	Managerial accountants can use the information provided by data mining to increase sales 
revenues, save costs, or improve operations, such as improving credit by reducing how often 
accounts payable invoices are paid late.
•	Tax accountants can use data mining to find tax deductions and tax credit qualifications 
for their clients. 
Some of the leading data mining vendors include RapidMiner, Alteryx Analytics, SAS Enter-
prise Miner, Sisense, and MySQL. These tools range from those with easy-to-use, friendly 
interfaces to more complex tools that may require using programming languages, such as 
Python or R, to write the desired data mining and tests.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.6: Reflect on Data Mining 
Results
You can improve data mining skills in a couple of ways (Self-Reflection):
•	 Think about how the data value and veracity contribute to creating reliable intelligence and 
insights for the objective of the analysis. This awareness includes watching for results that 
might be random correlations with little or no business value.
•	 Estimate the potential data value that could be created by mining the data, and compare that 
value to the costs and risks associated with continuing current strategies. For example, looking 
for sales revenues to customers from states far from each specific store’s location may help to 
focus efforts on fraudulent invoices.

10.2 Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-15
 ILLUSTRATION 10.10  Product Placement Findings from Supermarket Data Mining 
Persistent demand (milk)
and clearance items are
located in the back, to
motivate customers to
walk through the store
High volume and
impulse buy products
sell best at eye level
Low turnover products
are best placed at the
bottom or top of shelves
 Let’s consider an accounting data mining example. Assume you are hired as a consultant 
to help a law firm identify how to best use their limited professional staff resources. Your 
objective questions may include:
•  Which legal service is the most profitable? 
•  Which service is performed most often? 
•  Which lawyer and paralegal team is currently earning the most client fee revenues for 
the law firm? 
•  Are any legal services being performed without being billed to clients? 
 Data mining tools can help gain insights to answer these questions. For example, you could
use data mining to verify whether all services performed have corresponding invoices. 
 Retail grocery stores, such as Wegmans, Publix, and Kroger, are credited as the first industry 
to create value from sales data mining. Empowered by point-of-sale cash register machines that 
integrated sales and AIS inventory data, supermarkets performed data mining to understand
what store, aisle, and shelf locations were associated with increases in product sales:
•  The first step was to create a categorical data field in their inventory tables which indi-
cated store location (aisle number, front cap, back cap, store front table, register aisle), 
and shelf position (shelf number, and left or right side). 
• The sales data with this location field was mined to learn which product locations were 
associated with high sales volume and which locations with low sales volume. 
•  Systematically and over time, each product’s position in the store was moved to determine 
which positions resulted in higher sales for which products, as well as which products’ 
sales were more resistant to location changes. 
 The next time you go to a grocery store you might notice some intentional product placement 
that is the result of mining store location data along with sales data. For example, temporary 
product promotions (e.g., strawberries during the spring) are best placed on the aisle end caps 
and store front display tables to capture customer attention ( Illustration 10.10 ). 

10-16 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Smart Contracts
A business contract is created whenever two parties, such as buyers and sellers, agree on the 
consideration (usually money) that one party will provide to the other party in exchange for 
goods or services. Business contracts can range from simple exchanges to complex agreements 
with many stipulations. Contract review is important for proper GAAP classifications, such as 
revenue recognition or lease treatment. Historically, contract content was not standardized, 
which meant that both parties had to conduct a detailed review of the contract to ensure 
proper accounting in their separate journals and ledgers.
Blockchain technologies are a new online technology that creates one shared record 
of transactions between parties. These distributed ledgers are extremely secure and cannot be 
altered after an agreement has been reached. Blockchain technologies can be used for transac-
tions with both digital and traditional currencies (Illustration 10.12).
ILLUSTRATION 10.12  Traditional Accounting Ledgers vs. 
Blockchain Ledgers
Seller Buyer
Date
Amount
S
B
9.14.22
10
――――
――――
――――
――――
Cash
10
Revenues
10
Seller S’s Records
Inventory
10
Cash
10
Buyer B’s Records
Traditional Accounting Ledgers
Blockchain Shared
Ledger
A specific and popular application of blockchain technology are smart contracts, 
which are secure online shared digital contracts. Smart contracts are now commonly used in 
healthcare, trading, lending, real estate, insurance, legal services, warranties, employment, 
and gaming contexts. Illustration 10.13 shows some typical smart lease contract data fields.
Data mining is perhaps the most common form of data analytics in accounting practice. 
It is useful for data preparation and data exploration. We can easily check for empty, incorrect, 
invalid, and duplicate data, and perform pattern identification tests, such as learning whether 
unusual logins indicate suspicious or unauthorized activity. Most data mining software dis-
plays the mining steps that have been performed on the data from left to right, which provides 
documentation for data verification procedures. Illustration 10.11 illustrates a simple data 
mining process.
ILLUSTRATION 10.11  A Simple Data Mining Process for Identifying Suspicious  
Bank Deposits
Suspicious
amounts and
unique patterns
Isolate
Visually
Inspect deposit
sizes, timing,
and frequencies
Load
Select
Graph
Bank deposits
data
Bank deposit
date, source,
amount, and
memo fields
Bank deposits
with unusual
amounts and
patterns

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-17
ILLUSTRATION 10.13  Typical Smart Lease Contract Data Fields
Smart contracts have important advantages over traditional contracts:
•	Contract templates provide organized, approved, and clearly labeled data field options, 
many of which are required by contract law or by GAAP rules for revenue recognition or 
lease categorization.
•	Contract parties collaboratively develop contract specifics using secured online shared 
documents, reducing the time needed for contract negotiation, verification, and signing, 
while providing stronger internal controls. Contract options can be activated or deacti-
vated as needed.
•	All signed contracts cannot easily be changed by either party and all changes made are 
documented with red flags to all parties, which can eliminate many misunderstandings 
and disagreements.
•	Smart contracts can automatically identify contract performance milestones, determine 
performance outcomes, and automatically trigger agreed payments between parties.
The standardized data fields make it easy for financial accountants to review and evaluate 
contracts and determine which GAAP rules are applicable. Auditors can easily verify the con-
tract accounting. In both cases, time traditionally spent data mining contracts can be spent on 
other services that create value.
Process Automation and Process Mining
From doorbell cameras to robotic vacuums, smart sensors and programmable controllers are 
making some homes operate more efficiently and effectively. In the same way, business pro-
cess automation tools are now performing routine tasks, freeing accountants to create value 
with critical thinking, problem-solving, and their resulting professional judgments.
While automated processes within software programs and equipment controllers have 
been available for decades, the recent development of across-program and across-equipment 
integrative tools have transformed many accounting tasks. In addition to greater performance 
accuracy and consistency, these new capabilities are producing activity logs that can be used 
to analyze and improve business processes.
Robotic Process Automation
Robotic process automation (RPA) is the set of software technologies that record a specific 
order of human keystrokes and mouse activity steps within or across digital applications. Once 
saved or recorded, these routines can be repeated by simply re-running the tool. RPA tools are 
Date of Agreement
Agreement Terms: performance and remittance responsibilities, consequences of contract breaches
Committed Assets: verification, fair market value, including any ownership transfers or bargain 
     purchase options
Performance Schedule: timing, performance metrics
Scheduled Automatic Payments: timing, amounts, and automatic payment transfer information
     Rights of each party
Agreement Type
Authenticated Agreement Parties
Secured:
898DFA06F8D44E1..

10-18 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
used for stable processes where the steps of the process do not change over time, such as when 
financial analysts download the closing stock prices of the same set of companies every day.
Interactive, real-time performance dashboards are a great example of the value creation pos-
sible from RPA technologies. For example, the objective of a cost accountant for a manufacturing 
plant that produces breakfast cereals is to control product costs. Without RPA, controlling product 
costs might involve two hours daily of performing data analyses on the previous day’s activity. 
RPA technologies could recoup those hours with an automated routine which mines the 
production data every night and displays the results on the next morning’s dashboard. The 
results could be interpreted each morning, which would make factory cost control efforts 
more effective and timely. Illustration 10.14 illustrates a sample production activity dash-
board that can result from implementing RPA.
ILLUSTRATION 10.14  Robotic Process Automation (RPA) Example Dashboard
Total Rejected Products for First Shif
Damaged 96
Defective 88
Others 2
12,785
Workers
26.68%
Recoverable
36,230
Expenses
KPIs for First Shif
Plant
Waste
Process
Waste
Lbs
Change
On
Target
7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00
15:00
14:00
13:00
12:00
Waste Produced-First Shif
0
7k
6k
5k
4k
3k
2k
1k
7:00
8:00
9:00 10:00 11:00
15:00
14:00
13:00
12:00
Robotic Process Automation
KPI met
KPI missed >10%
Quality
Damaged
Defective
Workers
Budgeted 
= 21,639
Actual
5 9
0
0
%

10.2 Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-19
ILLUSTRATION 10.15 
Accounting Tasks that Benefit 
from RPA
Transaction 
Processing
Exception
Incident
Distributions
Performance
and Control
Dashboards
Account 
Maintenance
Employee
Time Records 
for Payroll
Recurring
Adjusting 
Entries
End of Period
Report Generation
Reconciliations
Collection of Public 
Internet Data
Straight-line
Depreciation
Charges
Completion of
Documents
and Forms
RPA
 Process Mining
 Process mining tools measure the timing and flow of data captured as business events 
occur. They help financial, managerial, and tax accountants better evaluate business process 
efficiency and effectiveness. Systems accountants also use process mining tools to evaluate 
AIS risks and control effectiveness. By describing where processes have more exceptions and 
 Professional Insight 10.1:  How Can RPA Be Used in Financial 
Accounting? 
 The summer before the final year of her accounting program, Brigitte completed an internship 
where she gained valuable experience working for a financial analyst. 
 The first half of the summer I was gathering financial statement balances 
and totals for over 400 companies each day so I could calculate and com-
pare 15 financial ratios.  Evaluating these ratio trends over time and comparing 
them to a competitor’s ratios or to the industry average can provide insights about prof-
itability, asset utilization, liquidity, and solvency. 
 About halfway through my internship, my boss suggested I learn how to 
use a routine process automation tool, UiPath, to write a routine to auto-
matically gather the financial data.  My RPA routine opened the SEC data website 
and sequentially entered each company’s code so the financial statement information would 
be displayed. My RPA script would then copy the data and paste it into an Excel worksheet, 
naming the sheet with that company’s code. 
 I then learned how to write the RPA script for the calculation and com-
parison of all the financial ratios. What had previously taken me over 
six hours a day to perform was now running overnight so that I would 
have the information first thing the following morning.  Then, I could criti-
cally evaluate the ratios’ meaning. I feel like my internship was much more valuable after 
automating the routine part of my day and spending my time learning the value of the 
information models I had created. 
Illustration 10.15 summarizes more of the common accounting uses for RPA.

10-20 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
delays, process mining also helps auditors adjust their audit plans to spend more time on the 
accounts and processes that have the greatest risk of financial statement errors and omissions.
Process mining can improve, innovate, or control existing processes:
•	Available data fields are typically extracted, joined, and transformed to create a process log.
•	The process log records what happened where, who was involved, when it happened, and 
can capture which controls were implemented or skipped over.
Let’s illustrate process mining with an example from a manufacturer of superhero figurines. 
Illustration 10.16 depicts the three major events in their sales cycle:
•	The sales department captures the sale and records it in the sales journal.
•	The shipping department ships all sales notifications received from the sales department 
and reduces inventory.
•	Accounts receivable matches sales orders and shipping notifications to create accurate 
invoices, which are sent to the customers.
ILLUSTRATION 10.16  Sales Cycle Example of Process Mining Tests
Capture sale
Superhero 3D Manufacturing
Customer arrives
Sales
Shipping
Accounts
Receivable
Record sale
in sales journal
Match the sales order
and the shipping
notification; create the
invoice and send to
customer
Invoice
Sales Journal
Inventory Subledger
Accounts
Receivable
Subledger
Sales Journal
Record the shipment
to reduce Inventory
1
2
3
The red lines in Illustration 10.16 depict the specific tests to be conducted from the pro-
cess mining, which can be expressed as these questions:
	 1.	 Are all sales captured reflected in the sales journal? What is the time delay between the 
capture and the recording of these sales? 
	 2.	 Are all sales captured in the sales journal shipped? What is the time delay between the 
sales capture and the shipment to the customer? Are all shipments recorded as reductions 
in the inventory subledger? Are there any sales journal entries that are made and not 
shipped in the same accounting period? (GAAP rules state that revenue cannot be recog-
nized until the sales transaction has been fulfilled.)
	 3.	 Do all invoices get posted to the accounts receivable subledger? How often and by how 
much are the sales journal entries different than the invoices? What is the time delay 
between the shipment and the invoice mailing to the customer?
The results may show that some captured sales are never shipped or do not ship in a timely 
fashion. Alternatively, there may be shipments that never turn into invoices, resulting in lost 
inventory. Finally, there may be differences between what is recorded in the sales journal 
and what invoice data is posted to the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger. To quickly show 

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-21
where and when the data variance happens for each of these questions, we could present pro-
cess mining results as dashboard dials, as data tables, or as data visualizations.
Process mining results may also reveal violation of authorization or segregation of duties 
controls, such as the sales department both authorizing the sales capture and recording the 
sales journal entries. This insight would lead to changing the process so that accounts receiv-
able is recording all sales transactions and sales events would not be recorded until after ship-
ping and invoicing.
Two other examples help illustrate the value provided by process mining. In the AIS practice 
area, analyzing system access logs with process mining can ensure that system access for termi-
nated employees is revoked in a timely manner. In managerial accounting, process mining can 
identify bottlenecks in business processes and establish relevant activity bases for activity-based 
costing systems. These examples document how process mining helps improve the internal con-
trols over the accounting systems, reducing audit risk for both internal and external auditors.
Continuous Auditing
Have you ever wondered why auditors wait until after the year-end to perform their journal and 
ledger data tests under tremendous time pressure? Or why they use data sampling techniques 
to infer whether ledger balances are reasonable rather than evaluating the population of data?
Continuous auditing technologies are programmed modules embedded in an organi-
zation’s AIS that evaluate transactions as they occur throughout the year:
•	Routine transactions are typically captured and tested in automated routines for consis-
tent processing.
•	If transactions do not pass the tests to be categorized as a routine transaction, they are usu-
ally copied to an exception file to be evaluated by the external auditors at year end. Exam-
ples of these exceptions are invoice totals that are too high or too low for what has been 
sold or payroll cash disbursements which do not match up to an authorized employee.
This testing of the entire population of transactions helps auditors develop a more accurate 
assessment of the risks inherent to amounts reported on the financial statements. ­Continuous 
auditing tools reduce the workload at year end and provide faster audits with higher ­quality. 
Illustration 10.17 illustrates continuous auditing modules employed at end of quarter 
throughout the year.
ILLUSTRATION 10.17  Quarterly Continuous Auditing Throughout the Year
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Most of the audit tests on internal controls and routine transactions
can be completed during the year using automated tests of transactions
and verification of the eﬀectiveness of internal controls.
Audit is completed at year end
on non-routine, adjusting, and
closing entries, testing
management assumptions and
estimations, and confirming
year-end balances.
Data is tested
Data is tested
Data is tested
Data is tested
The first users of continuous auditing were large banks and credit card companies. Both 
industries have millions of transactions occurring every day, which create a high data volume 
that is difficult to confidently sample by year end. More recently, companies in extractive and 
manufacturing industries have joined auditors in embracing continuous auditing technolo-
gies to support their internal applications.
Continuous auditing technologies also make audits more proactive rather than reactive. 
Accounting record issues and errors can be evaluated and corrected when they occur, increas-
ing the integrity and reliability of internal data gathered after those corrections are made:
•	Evaluating emerging data patterns earlier in the year can identify new tax strategies or 
areas where more internal controls are needed.
•	Logging unusual internet use data points can identify cybersecurity risks earlier, which 
means that controls can be implemented.

10-22
CHAPTER 10 Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
•  Automated evaluation of routine transaction data frees auditors to focus time and energy 
on audit process steps that contain more financial statement risk. 
 Tests of revenue recognition, inventory valuation, and cash flows are a few examples of areas 
where both internal and external auditors are using continuous auditing. 
 Textual Analysis
 Textual analysis tools analyze word choices in footnotes, investor communications, blogs, 
social media postings, and other documentation, such as contract language for revenue rec-
ognition treatment.  Textual mining tools evaluate word choice and usage to reveal insights 
about honesty, transparency, intent, and sentiments in communications by management, 
elected officials, and customers. Text counts and text patterns can be coded into categories of 
meaning, which are then analyzed along with numerical data for insights. 
These tools make harvesting data efficient from sources such as financial footnotes and 
management emails to online customer feedback. Textual analysis can generate business 
intelligence, audit intelligence, and tax planning value. There are a few examples of text min-
ing sources in the accounting profession:
•  Lease contract language 
•  Annual reports, financial statement footnotes, and 10K or 10Q filings 
•  xBRL text data fields 
•  Auditor letters and reports 
•  Investor relation press releases 
•  Correspondence from regulators 
•  Tax planning and response letters 
 We can also use textual analysis on formal and informal social media communications by 
analysts, auditors, and regulators to categorize the favorability or pessimism in those commu-
nications ( Illustration 10.18 ). 
 ILLUSTRATION 10.18  Optimistic and Pessimistic 
Word Categories: Annual Report Examples 
Applaud
Favorable
Successful
Positive
Optimistic Terms
Bleak
Costly
Troubled
Unstable
Pessimistic Terms
 Diligent Institute is the leading technology solution designed to improve board of direc-
tors’ fiduciary responsibilities to oversee management decisions. They create financial and 
textual analysis dashboard visualizations to focus board members’ attention on the areas of 
the organization with the greatest risks. For example, they have used textual analysis to show

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-23
Textual analysis that evaluates the use of passive versus active verbs and the ratio of pos-
itive words to negative words, often called the polarity of the communication, helps to cate-
gorize communications. These categories can then be analyzed in combination with financial 
statement totals or ratios to better predict future earnings, bankruptcy risk, or stock prices.
Cognitive Technologies
If you have interacted with Apple devices, then you have witnessed the power of Siri, the vir-
tual assistant feature of Apple’s operating system. Siri is a user-friendly artificial intelligence 
tool programmed to answer most questions and research requests. Cognitive technologies 
are artificial intelligence technologies that use a human expert judgment mimicking internal 
algorithm. Accountants typically use AIS data to train their models for accuracy for diagnos-
ing and predicting objectives, and then adjust their model as new data is added. Cognitive 
technologies are used in many fields, including training, production, farming, banking, retail, 
healthcare, tourism, and utilities, and in a variety of business functions within organizations. 
They can range from simplistic decision models to dynamic, complex models.
Complex cognitive tools are also called artificial neural networks, machine learning, and 
expert systems. These models are programmed to accurately perform data classification tasks 
for diagnostic or prediction objectives. For the model to be accurate, the underlying phenom-
ena variables should behave in stable or consistent patterns.
Cognitive technology tools perform best in stable environments because they use old 
data to define a complex mathematical algorithm which will, over time, produce an expert 
ILLUSTRATION 10.19  Diligent Institute’s Board Member Sentiment Tracker
Source: www.diligentinstitute.com/sentiment-tracker/
corporate board members’ sentiment rating over time. These results show how optimistic cor-
porate board members are about the upcoming opportunities and performance possibilities in 
their organizations (Illustration 10.19).

10-24 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
ILLUSTRATION 10.20  Cognitive Technology in Accounting
Classification Purposes
Loan Default
Journal Entries
Optimization
Rare Expertise
Asset Valuation
Predict
transaction
errors
Group
abnormal
transactions
by type
Determine
optimal
smart controller
settings for
equipment,
vehicles, and
appliances
Predict expected
weather,
vehicle issues,
or maintenance
patterns
Mimic human
expert judgments
Identify medical
settlement
categories
Classify asset
valuations
Train through
iterative asset 
scenario
simulations
Classify loans
in loan
default risk
categories
Estimate
bankruptcy
risk
Prediction Purposes
The accounting profession is embracing many valuable applications of cognitive tech-
nologies across all professional practice areas. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
(COSO), which provides accounting internal control and risk management models, expects 
these tools to provide value through:
•	Increased security and internal control.
•	Improved cost reductions, operational productivity, and process quality.
•	Predictive analytics.
•	Innovation through iterative testing.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.7: Recognize Risks with 
Cognitive Technologies
Using cognitive technologies is not risk-free. For example, if a classification model incorrectly 
rejects a loan application due to a data error, then the lending institution could lose business. 
COSO suggests considering the following (Risks):
•	 Potential biases by the expert who developed the cognitive technology.
•	 High potential for errors from data and interpretation.
•	 Changing laws and regulations that may have been overlooked in the model.
•	 Changing underlying conditions or ranges of values that may make your model less predictive.
•	 Vulnerabilities to security attacks.
•	 Negative reactions from employees, customers, and other impacted stakeholders.
COSO also recommends cognitive technology policies to increase internal controls:
•	Establish governance structure for all cognitive technology tool applications.
•	Develop a risk management strategy.
decision. The most advanced models, called adaptive cognitive technologies, can adjust their 
underlying models with every new data point, but these changes are typically very small, as 
the models were trained on very large data sets.
Illustration 10.20 lists a few common uses of cognitive technologies in accounting.

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-25
•	Regularly assess the risks of the organization’s cognitive technology applications.
•	Evaluate the cognitive technology applications as a portfolio rather than individual assets.
•	Document and internally share the risk appetite and risk response commitments associ-
ated with cognitive technology use to increase transparency.
Apply It 10.2
Use Process 
Automation to 
Analyze Financial 
Statements
Financial Accounting   Data   The macro record option in Excel illustrates the power of RPA for 
financial statement analysis. Try using it to analyze accounts receivable liquidity for a selection of 
leading outdoor gear companies. 
You have developed an objective question: Which of the leading outdoor gear industry com-
panies had the best liquidity with regards to accounts receivable? The following data is provided for 
each company for the years 2014-2019:
•	 Income statement: Net sales revenues, cost of goods sold, gross profit, and net income.
•	 Balance sheet: Year-end accounts receivable and inventory balances.
Record one macro routine on the first worksheet to calculate accounts receivable turnover, and then 
repeat the macro on the subsequent workbook sheets that contain the financial statement data from 
other companies.
SOLUTION
Ratio Values and Graph from the Comparison worksheet.
Comparison of Accounts Receivable Turnovers
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Fenix
11.9
13.1
13.6
14.1
14.0
13.5
Clarus
  5.7
  5.9
  5.8
  5.9
  5.9
  4.9
Columbia
  6.5
  6.7
  7.1
  6.9
  6.5
  5.3
VF Corp
  8.3
  8.6
  8.8
  2.1
  8.7
  6.9
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2015
2016
Accounts Receivable Turnover
2017
2018
2019
2020
Fenix
Clarus
Columbia
VF Corp
Fenix Outdoor has the best accounts receivable liquidity throughout this six-year period.
Building and Using the Excel Macro
1.	 Open the Apply It 10.2 data file. Your platform may ask you to enable macros and to make this 
file a trusted file. Select Yes for both.
2.	 Go to the first sheet for Fenix Outdoor and select the View tab. Select Macro (last option on 
right). Select Record and name your new macro “AccRecTurnover.”
3.	 Place the cursor on cell C18. Type the formula “=C7/((sum(B13:C13))/2)” and click Enter.
4.	 Copy this formula to D18-H18. Remove the adjacent cell error by right clicking on the error 
icon to the left of this formula and select Ignore error.
5.	 Go back to View Macro, and stop recording.

10-26 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
6.	 Next, go into each remaining company data sheets and click Cell C18. Select View > View 
Macros > AccRecTurnover > Run. Watch as the macro performs the ratio calculations for 
each company, saving you from having to re-create the steps for each company. Remove the 
adjacent cell error on each sheet by right clicking on the error icon to the left of this formula 
and selecting Ignore error.
7.	 Now, open the Comparison worksheet. All the accounts receivable turnover results linked to 
this comparison sheet should be visible. Highlight all the data cells, B3:H7.
8.	 Under top menu, select Insert, and add a line chart.
9.	 Double click on the chart title and change it to “Accounts Receivable Turnover.” Compare 
results. 
10.3  How are Data and Analyses 
Developments Impacting the Professional 
Practice Areas?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Demonstrate how data and technology developments are adding value to professional 
practice.
Emerging data, analyses, and technologies are significantly impacting each area of professional 
practice. Accounting tasks are more accurate and completed in less time, freeing accountants 
to focus on using critical thinking and creative ways to add value to their organizations.
Accounting Information Systems
Accounting information systems professionals manage the design, implementation, and eval-
uation of the accounting system transaction processing and business intelligence informa-
tion. Many new data options are improving data volume, variety, veracity, and value for AIS 
users. New analysis tools discussed here help systems accountants improve their AIS data 
analyses:
•	Detecting unauthorized intrusion (data mining, process mining).
•	Transaction cycle throughput, internal controls effectiveness, delays, and errors (data 
mining, process mining, continuous auditing).
•	Artificial intelligence supports and supplements scarce IT experts (cognitive technologies).
•	Routine data and system maintenance (RPA).
•	Automating system updates (RPA).
•	Automatic performance reporting for department managers (RPA).

10.3  How are Data and Analyses Developments Impacting the Professional Practice Areas? 
10-27
With these new data and technology options, systems accountants can consider alternative 
data capture, storage, processing, controls, and performance evaluation methods: 
•	One possibility is adopting the capacity and value offered by cloud data services.
•	Another is using internal continuous auditing and process mining to evaluate system 
performance and security issues.
•	They can also identify processes where cognitive technologies and routine process auto-
mation can allow employees to spend more time interpreting information and adding 
value to their organizations.
For example, systems accountants can help marketing and sales departments by creating visu-
alizations of the technologies being used by their key managers (Illustration 10.21).
Auditing
Both internal and external auditors also using many of the emerging data and technology 
options to increase the quality of audits while reducing their costs. RPA, cognitive technolo-
gies, process mining, and continuous auditing are improving analytical testing of controls and 
substantive testing since an entire population of transactions can be analyzed.
ILLUSTRATION 10.21  AIS Analytics Value for Marketing and Sales Functions
Jun 1
0k
2k
4k
6k
Emails
Jul 1
Aug 1
Calls
Jun 1
Jul 1
Aug 1
0
500
1,000
1,500
LinkedIn Messages
Jun 16
Jul 1
Jul 16
0
50
100
Customer Meetings
Jun 1
Jul 1
Aug 1
0
200
400
600
Sales Activity by Team Type

10-28 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
New combinations of data, information models, and graphics make it easier to under-
stand a client’s business and data (e.g., dashboard visualizations such as Illustration 10.15), 
and can be used to communicate and audit’s “story” to management and boards of directors.
AIS audit trail log data (user ID, date, and time stamp) is helpful for verifying segregation 
of duties. Continuous auditing also has advantages:
•	Reduced audit sample risk, as inferences from limited samples are reduced or eliminated 
from the process.
•	Auditors can focus on prioritized risks in their clients’ data, such as management’s asser-
tions and estimates, and increase their audit quality consistency across clients.
•	Audits can be finished closer to the fiscal year end date, which will increase the value of 
the client’s financial statement information in the capital markets.
Audit firms can also develop their own intellectual property intelligent assets as they create 
confidential tools for their firms. However, there may be audit risks associated with these 
emerging data analytics options, such as client AIS and auditor tool compatibility, and issues 
with data security and privacy. For example, audit risk is impacted if clients’ systems are not 
compatible with new audit tools, if the client uses an integration of different systems patched 
together, or if the data integrity from the clients’ system is low. In these cases, the tools may 
not retrieve enough data or the appropriate data for the auditors’ evaluations.
Auditors are performing a variety of their tasks using the tools discussed in this chapter: 
•	Classifying unusual transactions (cognitive technologies).
•	Performing risk level assessments (continuous auditing and cognitive technologies).
•	Selecting better samples for substantive testing (blockchain technologies and data mining).
•	Performing analytics on selected data for substantive testing (process mining).
•	Testing transactions for routine qualities (continuous auditing modules, cognitive tech-
nologies, and data mining).
•	Monitoring and evaluating internal controls (process mining).
•	Evaluating ongoing concerns (cognitive technologies).
Auditors often use analytics to improve judgments about whether recorded account balances 
are reasonable, which helps them improve their substantive test sample selections (Illustra-
tion 10.22).
ILLUSTRATION 10.22  
Visualization used by Auditors 
for Reasonableness of Payroll 
Expenses.
$2,000
$1,600
$1,200
$800
1,000
2,000
3,000
Monthly Number of Employees
Monthly Payroll
Payable ($000)
4,000
5,000
6,000

10.3  How are Data and Analyses Developments Impacting the Professional Practice Areas? 
10-29
Financial Accounting
Financial accountants are also using these new data, analysis, and technology developments 
for both their GAAP compliance responsibilities and their assessments and predictions of 
business value, risk, and future capital needs. Some of the more common application areas of 
these technologies include:
•	Reconciliations (RPA).
•	Temporary account closures (RPA).
•	Routine consolidations (RPA and process mining).
•	Accounting period end closing entries (RPA).
•	Footnote preparation (textual analysis).
•	Statutory and regulatory report content generation (cognitive technologies).
•	Proforma financial statement generation (data mining and pattern detection).
•	Scanning of changes in external environment (textual analysis).
•	Data patterns and relationships to explain stock market valuation changes (data mining, 
blockchain, and continuous auditing).
Routine process automations are a natural fit for financial accounting. Stable, iterative reve-
nue, expenditure, payroll, production, and financial accounting processes can easily be cap-
tured and then reused with recorded macros. Additionally, process mining helps ­evaluate the 
efficiencies, effectiveness, and controls in each accounting step (see Illustration 10.16).
Cognitive technologies can be used to both predict financial outcomes and classify busi-
ness option risks. Textual content is analyzed for regulatory implications and earnings expecta-
tions communication. Finally, many CFO’s can now monitor their financial ratio performance 
real-time using live dashboards tied to their accounting systems (Illustration 10.23)
ILLUSTRATION 10.23  
Sample Dashboard for Financial 
Accountants
2018
2019
2020
Return on Assets
2021
12%
2022
2023
2024
Working Capital Ratio
Balance Sheet 2024
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
28%
Total Assets
Total Liabilities
$ 3,000,000
$ 3,850,000
Current Liabilities
$ 1,800,000
Shareholder Equity
$ 2,050,000
Current Assets
$ 2,400,000
Financial Performance
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024

10-30 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Managerial Accounting
Managerial accountants are not tied to the GAAP data restrictions or the IRS data rules, allow-
ing them more freedom and creativity to solve problems and identify opportunities than the 
more regulated practice areas:
•	Managerial accountants have traditionally used broad sets of operational and market data 
to find the most effective least expensive solutions for their organizations.
•	As confidential advisors to the management team, they tend to quickly embrace new data 
analyses opportunities, for descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive objectives 
in budgeting, costing, pricing, investment, or controlling tasks.
•	These new analysis tools are helping to improve the performance of functional depart-
ments, such as human resources, marketing, sales, and inventory management.
The new data options let managerial accountants add value by helping them ask better 
­questions, accurately identify priority issues, and develop intelligence and solutions to sup-
port their management team’s decision-making. Because smart devices and social media are 
increasingly used by organizations, managerial accountants are managing data with greater 
volume, variety, and velocity than before, and they must control data veracity by properly 
capturing, processing, and storing data. 
Several new technologies are helping managerial accountants improve processes and add 
value to their organizations. RPAs can quickly create daily performance dashboards across 
organizational functions, cognitive technologies forecast sales and production levels, data and 
process mining help optimize operational control, and blockchain technologies are capturing 
resource transfers within the organization, such as inventory transfers across warehouses. 
Managerial accountants can keep track of their areas of responsibility using the tools discussed 
in this chapter to create visualizations for dashboards (Illustration 10.24).
ILLUSTRATION 10.24  
Sample Dashboard for Managerial 
Accountants
Top 10 Customers
Units
Sold
ProductID
CustomerID
Units
Sold
100,000
11
15
23
37
48
59
66
81
103
155
200,000
300,000
400,000
Top 10 Products
0
123
135
145
155
159
163
172
184
188
192
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
Sales
GP
Sales
GP
Financial Performance

10.3  How are Data and Analyses Developments Impacting the Professional Practice Areas? 
10-31
Process mining is helping managerial accountants identify business process areas where 
costs can be reduced:
•	Mining transactions for increased travel expense, miscellaneous expense, or overhead 
cost account to control costs.
•	Cost savings in general, including reducing headcounts, are easier to identify with pro-
cess mining.
Other technologies have applications, as well:
•	Improving decision-making by making more types of data accessible for analysis. 
•	Discovering new business insights in revenue, expenditure, and operational processes 
(data mining, process mining, and cognitive technology). 
•	Increasing employee productivity with useful dashboards and automations of routine 
task completion (RPA).
•	Enhancing product offerings through innovation desired by customers (textual analysis 
of social media postings).
Managerial accountants are also faced with new challenges, many of which include ethical 
considerations about digital data privacy and security (see Illustration 10.7 and Applying Crit-
ical Thinking 10.5). Another challenge is data veracity, since dirty data can produce incorrect 
analysis results which can negatively impact decision-making. Properly preparing data catch 
and repair corrupt, incomplete, inaccurate, or inappropriate data formats that improve data 
analyse results’ reliability.
Finally, managerial accountants might miss opportunities in data that they do not use in 
their analyses. Dark data refers to the available operational data that are not used by an orga-
nization. The related costs of data capture, management, and storage can be significant, and 
if the data are not being used, then the possible business intelligence value may be reduced.
Tax Accounting
While initially the slowest area of accounting practice to use data analytics, tax accountants 
are now moving quickly toward using many new data and analysis technologies:
•	Cognitive technologies are heavily utilized for compliance testing and for the evaluation 
of multi-jurisdictional sales and use taxes.
•	Textual analysis is increasingly used to better understand and interpret new tax law in the 
unstructured data posted on the internet.
•	Process tools help tax accountants better understand which processes in an organization 
or client’s portfolio are driving their tax liabilities, improving the value of tax planning 
significantly.
Data pattern documentation has been a long-held tradition for tax treatment choices. For 
example, consider when a tax accountant must explain the “tax shield” power of LIFO cost of 
goods sold valuation in inflationary periods to board members:
•	If the tax accountant simply states that the LIFO tax shield defers income tax liabilities 
to a later taxable period without explaining why, the meaning of why this is the case may 
be lost.
•	But, if that accountant additionally illustrates and explains how a LIFO adoption and a 
LIFO adoption for inventory valuation on the balance sheet creates a stronger current 
cash flows relationship with cost of goods sold on the income statement, the board 
members can more easily follow how current tax liabilities and cash outflows would 
be reduced by the company’s “tax shield.”
Both tax planning and compliance practice areas are demanding more efficient processes, 
effective planning, accurate compliance, and increased tax intelligence. These new technol-
ogies are delivering this by analyzing greater data volume and data variety. RPA is providing 

10-32 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
efficiencies and decreasing tax function costs. Data mining visualizations can identify tax 
liability drivers. Cognitive technologies provide accurate tax liability predictions, as well 
as proper transfer pricing and tax treatment classifications, especially in assessing complex 
multi-entity and multi-jurisdictional tax liability contexts ­(Illustration 10.25).
Professional Insight 10.2: How are New Technology Tools Used 
in Tax Accounting?
Brandi recently graduated with her Master of Accountancy and is working for a regional tax 
­practice. She explained how she uses data analytics in her daily work.
Because different countries have different value-added, sales, and use 
tax policies and rates, companies have to be very strategic determining 
which parts of their operations are performed in which countries. Several 
new tools have helped me perform this work.
Transfer pricing refers to the prices at which we sell resources from our business units or 
subsidiaries in one tax jurisdiction to our companies in another tax jurisdiction for the 
purpose of minimizing tax liabilities. The different processing steps must be considered, 
from raw materials to finished goods, to determine where our company processes should 
be located.
I use a variety of advanced analysis tools in my daily tasks. I describe data 
with a data mining tool, and I gain insights about the risk in the data from 
process mining tools. I really enjoyed the freedom to help my company figure out 
the best country to create, further process, or assemble these resources. The objective 
is to operate legally while minimizing operational costs and tax liabilities. Before these 
process mapping technologies, such as Alteryx and Celonis, were available, we had to 
build individual Excel files for each possible operational combination between countries. 
Creating these spreadsheets was time consuming, they poorly documented the origi-
nal purpose, and it was difficult to integrate and evaluate the information across these 
spreadsheets.
I used robotic process automation to retrieve and enter the data for the 
spreadsheets, which has saved me more than a dozen hours every week. 
A particular advantage of moving our work to newer technologies such as 
PowerBI and Alteryx, is that automatic documentation is capturing each 
step of our workflows and our data manipulation processes alike.
ILLUSTRATION 10.25  Tax 
Accountants Use Visualizations to 
Guide Their Judgments
2022
2023
2024
Amount
Tax Year
0
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
Federal Tax Book Income vs. Taxable Income
Book Income
Taxable Income
Book Income
Taxable Income
Book Income
Taxable Income

10.3  How are Data and Analyses Developments Impacting the Professional Practice Areas? 
10-33
Analyses that integrate data variety and data mining visualizations are helping tax accoun-
tants to better understand when their organizations or clients are approaching the boundaries 
of acceptable tax categories. The technology advances reviewed in this chapter are helping tax 
accountants drill down to supply chain events that are driving tax liabilities, advancing real-
time tax advice potentially saving organizations and clients significant cash resources.
Apply It 10.3
Match Professional 
Practice Areas 
to Analyses and 
Technologies
Match how the following data analyses and technologies are used to at least one professional practice 
area’s acronym. Accounting information systems (AIS), auditing, financial accounting, managerial 
accounting, and tax accounting. 
Accounting 
Area
Data Analyses/Technology Uses
Forecasting classifications of new customers into post-sale interaction 
categories with machine learning.
Evaluating cloud data usage patterns with process mining.
Standardizing equipment lease contracts with blockchain smart contracts.
Documenting segregation of duties in the expenditure cycle with process 
mining.
Optimizing taxable transfer prices across global facilities with machine 
learning.
Communicating operational strategic metric progress to management with 
storytelling.
Closing revenue, expense, gain, loss, and dividend accounts at year end 
with RPA.
Controlling unauthorized system access with process mining on log-in data.
Verifying accounts receivable balances with fulfilled invoice data using 
process mining.
SOLUTION
Accounting 
Area
Data Analyses/Technology Uses
Managerial 
accounting
Forecasting classifications of new customers into post-sale interaction 
categories with machine learning.
AIS
Evaluating cloud data usage patterns with process mining.
Financial 
accounting
Standardizing equipment lease contracts with blockchain smart contracts.
Auditing
Documenting segregation of duties in the expenditure cycle with process 
mining.
Tax 
accounting
Optimizing taxable transfer prices across global facilities with machine 
learning.
Managerial 
accounting
Communicating operational strategic metric progress to management with 
storytelling.
Financial 
accounting
Closing revenue, expense, gain, loss, and dividend accounts at year end with 
RPA.
AIS
Controlling unauthorized system access with process mining on log-in data.
Auditing
Verifying accounts receivable balances with fulfilled invoice data using 
process mining.

10-34 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Chapter Review and Practice
Learning Objectives Review
❶  Describe data trends impacting the accounting 
profession.
Trends in data volume, variety, velocity, veracity, and value are creat-
ing both opportunities and challenges across accounting areas: 
•  Data volume refers to amount of data used in analyses. The 
increased volume of data generated and collected by organiza-
tions have led to new developments in data storage. Cloud data 
services offer organizations secure and easily expandable data 
storage, expert data management, hardware and software, and IT 
expertise. Private clouds serve a single organization or a set group 
of non-competing organizations. Public clouds serve many differ-
ent businesses. Hybrid cloud storage have both ­private and public 
virtual server sections.
•  Data variety refers to the diversity of data structures and mea-
surement scales in the data we want to analyze. Accountants 
have traditionally selected and analyzed structured data, but are 
now combining structured data with unstructured data for anal-
ysis, using pictures and text and GPS data, for example.
•  Data velocity is the speed at which new data points are gener-
ated. The higher the data velocity, the faster data volume grows. 
High velocity data can come from both internal or external 
sources.
•  Data veracity is the reliability of data. Veracity depends on three 
things: if the data are expected to provide insights for the anal-
ysis, how accurate the data must be to generate useful insights, 
and how complete the data must be to generate useful insights.
•  Data value refers to the additional benefits the data provides 
toward the objective of an analysis.
•  There are also ethical considerations when considering the stor-
age and use of data. Accountants must consider data privacy 
laws and regulations when working with, storing, and sharing 
data.
❷  Explain how technology developments are impact-
ing data analysis in accounting.
Accountants can efficiently analyze more data than ever before using 
data analysis tools:
•  Data analyses can produce new intelligence for improving how 
resources and processes can increase operational performance, 
competitiveness, and achieve financial objectives.
•  Data mining is the systematic process of looking for issues or 
patt­erns occurring within or between data fields. Data min-
ing is a common form of data analytics in accounting practice. 
Most data mining software automatically documents the mining 
steps, which is useful for data and analyses verification.
•  Blockchain technologies create one shared, secure, and difficult 
to change record of transactions between parties. This technol-
ogy creates smart contracts, which are secure online shared dig-
ital contracts.
•  Robotic process automation software automates routine, stable 
processes that can then be easily repeated.
•  Process mining tools measure the timing and flow of data 
captured as business events happen. These tools help accoun-
tants better evaluate business process control, efficiency, and 
effectiveness.
•  Continuous auditing technologies are programmed modules 
embedded in the AIS that evaluate transactions as they occur 
throughout the year, reducing the year-end work.
•  Textual analysis tools help accountants analyze word choices 
in footnotes, investor and management communications, and 
other documents, such as legal contracts.
•  Cognitive technologies are artificial intelligence technologies 
that mimic human expert judgments.
❸  Demonstrate how data and technology develop-
ments are adding value to professional practice.
•  Accounting information systems accountants can add value using 
AIS system log data and cognitive technologies, continuous audit-
ing, data mining, process mining, and robotic process automation.
•  New technologies can increase audit quality and reduce audit 
time and costs. RPA, cognitive technologies, process mining, 
and continuous auditing are improving analytical testing of con-
trols and testing of entire populations of data, rather than just 
inferential samples, are creating new audit value.
•  Financial accountants use new technologies in both their GAAP 
compliance responsibilities and for assessing and predicting 
business value, risk, and future capital needs. RPA, process min-
ing, cognitive technologies, and textual analyses are all being 
used in the financial accounting function.
•  New data options and technologies are helping managerial 
accountants better identify priority issues, ask better questions, 
use data with greater value, and develop intelligence solutions 
to support management decision-making.
•  Tax accountants use cognitive technology for compliance test-
ing, textual analysis to understand and interpret unstructured 
data, and process tools to better understand processes that affect 
tax liabilities.

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-35
Key Terms Review
Blockchain technologies  10-16
Cloud data services  10-3
Cognitive technologies  10-23
Continuous auditing technologies  10-21
Data mining  10-14
Data value  10-8
Data variety  10-5
Data velocity  10-6
Data veracity  10-7
Data volume  10-2
Hybrid clouds  10-4
Private clouds  10-3
Process mining tools  10-19
Public clouds  10-4
Robotic process automation (RPA)  10-17
Smart contracts  10-16
Textual analysis  10-22
Textual mining  10-22
HOW TO 10.1  Create a Comparative Income Statement in Excel
Illustration 10.6 demonstrated how considering the value of data can provide useful insights 
when deciding whether to drop a net loss-producing product line of computer keyboards 
(Product B). As a reminder, the segment contribution margin calculation was more valuable 
than the contribution margin calculation because it considered the traceable fixed costs which 
could be avoided if the product line were dropped.
What You Need: Data   The How To 10.1 data file. 
STEP 1: Open the Excel file and review the data field columns extracted from this company’s 
AIS database. The retrieved data has summarized monthly totals for units sold, price, and cost 
information for the 2025 year for two product lines, A and B (Illustration 10.26).
How To
ILLUSTRATION 10.26  Data Set Columns
fx
1
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
A
B
L
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
Year
January
January
February
February
March
March
April
April
May
May
June
June
July
July
August
August
September
September
October
October
November
November
December
December
Month
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
Product
600
1,710
700
1,640
760
1,360
740
1,270
820
1,200
900
940
980
860
1,040
720
1,220
650
1,300
600
1,380
550
1,560
500
SumUnits
Sold
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
Price
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
VCunit
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
Traceable
FCunit
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
Common
FCunit
$    21,600.00
$ 136,800.00
$    25,200.00
$ 131,200.00
$    27,360.00
$ 108,800.00
$    26,640.00
$ 101,600.00
$    29,520.00
$    96,000.00
$    32,400.00
$    75,200.00
$    35,280.00
$    68,800.00
$    37,440.00
$    57,600.00
$    43,920.00
$    52,000.00
$    46,800.00
$    48,000.00
$    49,680.00
$    44,000.00
$    56,160.00
$    40,000.00
Total
DirectVC
$ 2,100.00
$ 5,985.00
$ 2,450.00
$ 5,740.00
$ 2,660.00
$ 4,760.00
$ 2,590.00
$ 4,445.00
$ 2,870.00
$ 4,200.00
$ 3,150.00
$ 3,290.00
$ 3,430.00
$  3,010.00
$ 3,640.00
$ 2,520.00
$ 4,270.00
$ 2,275.00
$ 4,550.00
$ 2,100.00
$ 4,830.00
$ 1,925.00
$ 5,460.00
$ 1,750.00
TotalApplied
CommonFC
$ 10,500.00
$ 32,062.50
$ 12,250.00
$ 30,750.00
$ 13,300.00
$ 25,500.00
$ 12,950.00
$ 23,812.50
$ 14,350.00
$ 22,500.00
$ 15,750.00
$ 17,625.00
$ 17,150.00
$ 16,125.00
$ 18,200.00
$ 13,500.00
$ 21,350.00
$ 12,187.50
$ 22,750.00
$ 11,250.00
$ 24,150.00
$ 10,312.50
$ 27,300.00
$    9,375.00
TotalApplied
TraceableFC
$    36,000.00
$ 171,000.00
$    42,000.00
$ 164,000.00
$    45,600.00
$ 136,000.00
$    44,400.00
$ 127,000.00
$    49,200.00
$ 120,000.00
$    54,000.00
$    94,000.00
$    58,800.00
$    86,000.00
$    62,400.00
$    72,000.00
$    73,200.00
$    65,000.00
$    78,000.00
$    60,000.00
$    82,800.00
$    55,000.00
$    93,600.00
$    50,000.00
Total
Revenues
AutoSave
Oﬀ
1
How To Walk-Throughs

10-36 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
STEP 2: There are different ways to create comparative contribution margin income state-
ments for 2025. Here is one option: 
•	 Go to the Data tab and select Sort. A pop-up window will appear. Verify the default My 
data has headers has been checked. Select Product in the first drop down list to ensure 
the data set is sorted properly.
•	 Insert two rows between Product A and Product B data to help separate this data (Illustra-
tion 10.27).
ILLUSTRATION 10.27  Results of Step 2
fx
1
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
A
L
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
Year
January
January
February
February
March
March
April
April
May
May
June
June
July
July
August
August
September
September
October
October
November
November
December
December
Month
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
Product
600
1,710
700
1,640
760
1,360
740
1,270
820
1,200
900
940
980
860
1,040
720
1,220
650
1,300
600
1,380
550
1,560
500
SumUnits
Sold
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
Price
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
VCunit
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
Traceable
FCunit
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
Common
FCunit
$    21,600.00
$ 136,800.00
$    25,200.00
$ 131,200.00
$    27,360.00
$ 108,800.00
$    26,640.00
$ 101,600.00
$    29,520.00
$    96,000.00
$    32,400.00
$    75,200.00
$    35,280.00
$    68,800.00
$    37,440.00
$    57,600.00
$    43,920.00
$    52,000.00
$    46,800.00
$    48,000.00
$    49,680.00
$    44,000.00
$    56,160.00
$    40,000.00
Total
Direct VC
$ 2,100.00
$ 5,985.00
$ 2,450.00
$ 5,740.00
$ 2,660.00
$ 4,760.00
$ 2,590.00
$ 4,445.00
$ 2,870.00
$ 4,200.00
$ 3,150.00
$ 3,290.00
$ 3,430.00
$ 3,010.00
$ 3,640.00
$ 2,520.00
$ 4,270.00
$ 2,275.00
$ 4,550.00
$ 2,100.00
$ 4,830.00
$ 1,925.00
$ 5,460.00
$ 1,750.00
TotalApplied
CommonFC
$ 10,500.00
$ 32,062.50
$ 12,250.00
$ 30,750.00
$ 13,300.00
$ 25,500.00
$ 12,950.00
$ 23,812.50
$ 14,350.00
$ 22,500.00
$ 15,750.00
$ 17,625.00
$ 17,150.00
$ 16,125.00
$ 18,200.00
$ 13,500.00
$ 21,350.00
$ 12,187.50
$ 22,750.00
$ 11,250.00
$ 24,150.00
$ 10,312.50
$ 27,300.00
$   9,375.00
Total Applied
TraceableFC
$    36,000.00
$ 171,000.00
$    42,000.00
$ 164,000.00
$    45,600.00
$ 136,000.00
$    44,400.00
$ 127,000.00
$    49,200.00
$ 120,000.00
$    54,000.00
$   94,000.00
$    58,800.00
$   86,000.00
$    62,400.00
$   72,000.00
$    73,200.00
$   65,000.00
$    78,000.00
$   60,000.00
$    82,800.00
$   55,000.00
$    93,600.00
$   50,000.00
Total
Revenues
AutoSave
Oﬀ
2
STEP 3: Enter a sum formula in cells D14 and D28 for total units sold for each product. The 
formula in the D14 cell is = sum(D2:D13). The other formulas follow the same pattern with 
their corresponding column letter name. The meaning of the calculated field in D14 = total 
Product A units sold and D28 = total Product B units sold. Then, in rows 14 and 28 enter sim-
ilar sums for Columns I, J, K, and L (Illustration 10.28).

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-37
fx
1
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
A
B
L
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
Year
January
January
February
February
March
March
April
April
May
May
June
June
July
July
August
August
September
September
October
October
November
November
December
December
Month
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
Product
600
1,710
700
1,640
760
1,360
740
1,270
820
1,200
900
940
980
860
1,040
720
1,220
650
1,300
600
1,380
550
1,560
12,000
12,000
500
SumUnits
Sold
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
$    60.00
$ 100.00
Price
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
36.00
80.00
VCunit
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
17.50
18.75
Traceable
FCunit
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
Common
FCunit
$  432,000.00
$ 960,000.00
$    21,600.00
$ 136,800.00
$    25,200.00
$ 131,200.00
$    27,360.00
$ 108,800.00
$    26,640.00
$ 101,600.00
$    29,520.00
$    96,000.00
$    32,400.00
$    75,200.00
$    35,280.00
$    68,800.00
$    37,440.00
$    57,600.00
$    43,920.00
$    52,000.00
$    46,800.00
$    48,000.00
$    49,680.00
$    44,000.00
$    56,160.00
$    40,000.00
Total
DirectVC
$ 42,000.00
$  42,000.00
$   2,100.00
$   5,985.00
$   2,450.00
$   5,740.00
$   2,660.00
$   4,760.00
$   2,590.00
$   4,445.00
$   2,870.00
$   4,200.00
$   3,150.00
$   3,290.00
$   3,430.00
$   3,010.00
$   3,640.00
$   2,520.00
$   4,270.00
$   2,275.00
$   4,550.00
$   2,100.00
$   4,830.00
$   1,925.00
$   5,460.00
$   1,750.00
TotalApplied
CommonFC
$ 210,000.00
$ 225,000.00
$    10,500.00
$    32,062.50
$    12,250.00
$    30,750.00
$    13,300.00
$    25,500.00
$    12,950.00
$    23,812.50
$    14,350.00
$    22,500.00
$    15,750.00
$    17,625.00
$    17,150.00
$    16,125.00
$    18,200.00
$    13,500.00
$    21,350.00
$    12,187.50
$    22,750.00
$    11,250.00
$    24,150.00
$    10,312.50
$    27,300.00
$      9,375.00
TotalApplied
TraceableFC
$    720,000.00
$ 1,200,000.00
$       36,000.00
$    171,000.00
$       42,000.00
$    164,000.00
$       45,600.00
$    136,000.00
$       44,400.00
$    127,000.00
$       49,200.00
$    120,000.00
$       54,000.00
$        94,000.00
$       58,800.00
$        86,000.00
$       62,400.00
$        72,000.00
$       73,200.00
$        65,000.00
$       78,000.00
$        60,000.00
$       82,800.00
$        55,000.00
$       93,600.00
$        50,000.00
Total
Revenues
AutoSave
Oﬀ
3
3
ILLUSTRATION 10.28  Results of Step 3
STEP 4: Starting in Column N row 3, enter the row descriptions and column titles from Illustra-
tion 10.6. Then, enter the cell address and formulas in each cell. Please note that column R has 
been removed. Adjust the column widths and properly format the data cells (Illustration 10.29).
ILLUSTRATION 10.29  Formatting the Table for Illustration 10.6 (With Cell Formulas)
Sales Revenues
+I14
+I28
=O6+P6
+O6
+J14
+K14
=O6–O7
=P6–P7
=Q6–Q7
+J28
+K28
+O10+P10
=Q8–Q10
=P8–P10
=O8–O10
+O10
+L14
+L28
=O13+P13
=O13+P13
+O11
=Q11–Q13
=S11–S13
=P11–P13
=O11–O13
=O7+P7
+O7
+O8
ProductA
2025 Income Statement
ProductB
Both
Product
Lines
Only
ProductA
Less: Variable Costs
Contribution Margin
Segment Margin
Less: Unavoidable Common
Net Income
Fixed Expenses
Less: Avoidable Fixed
fx
O
P
N
Q
S
6
5
4
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
AutoSave
Oﬀ
Expenses
4
Sheet1
The completed Excel table should look equivalent to Illustration 10.6.

10-38 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
STEP 5: Self-reflection: Consider how the analysis could contribute to the decision to keep or 
drop Product B. Are there any limitations to the analysis that should be considered?
•	 The results indicate this data has data veracity for the objective of deciding whether to drop 
Product B. By creating the comparative income statements in Illustration 10.6, we can ana-
lyze the contribution margin and segment margin, in addition to the net income generated 
by each product.
•	 Since many people are more proficient in Excel compared to other analysis tools, we may 
conclude that Excel was the best tool for efficiently building the income statement informa-
tion models. We were able to calculate all totals quickly with cell references or easy formu-
las, and it is easy to format the table with both the text labels and the currency formatting 
in the table cells.
•	 It might be difficult for another employee or auditor to verify these calculations. They 
would have to examine each formula cell to determine if the calculations were appropri-
ate or accurate. Since we cannot know what another person was thinking and deciding 
when creating this kind of information model spreadsheet, the finished spreadsheet does 
not provide the best documentation for someone else to understand, verify, or learn from. 
Additionally, the work we did for this spreadsheet could not be re-used with a new data set.
Illustration 10.30 is the completed, correct final Alteryx workflow. Use it as a guide as you 
work through the steps of this analysis.
HOW TO 10.2 
Use Process Automation to Analyze Product 
Contributions to Net Income
How To 10.1 demonstrated how to use Excel to create the analysis shown in Illustration 10.6. 
What if you wanted to create an automated process to generate the same illustration? An 
automated data analysis tool, Alteryx, can be used to create a comparative income statement.
What You Need: Data   The How To 10.2 data file. (Ask your instructor how to access the 
Alteryx software and how to name the results files.)
STEP 1: Open Alteryx and select the Favorites tab at the top of the screen. This set of tool 
icons contains the tools necessary for recreating Illustration 10.6.
How To
Input
Data
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
+
SDK Examples
Text Mining
Machine Learning
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Join
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula
Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Summarize Comment
∑
Browse
1
ILLUSTRATION 10.30  Alteryx Workflow for Creating Comparative Income Statements
Sum Data Totals
by Product
Calculate Income
Statement Line
Item Totals
Create the
Illustration 10.6
table format
Output the Income
Statement to
Excel filename.xlsx
Product -
Ascending
Calculate Totals
by Revenues, VC,
Traceable FC, and
Common FC
Input the HowTo_10.2
dataset

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-39
STEP 2: Add the Input Data tool to the workflow by dragging the icon into the biggest win-
dow on the Alteryx screen:
•	 Then, in the box under Connect a File or Database, select the down arrow. Import Sheet1 
of the Excel data set. 
•	 Run the input tool by clicking the blue Run button at the top right.
STEP 3: Add the Sort tool by dragging the icon into the workflow window to the right of the 
input icon.
•	 In the top left window, sort on the Product column in ascending order.
•	 Add the annotation (a comment of your choice) by clicking on the small luggage tag icon, 
which is the third icon on the left of the screen. 
•	 Run the sort (Illustration 10.31). 
Notice the Results window at the bottom right. The second icon on the far left will allow you 
to look at the data being input into the Sort step. The third icon shows the data results after 
the Sort function has run. In this view, the Product column rows have been sorted, and the 
Product A rows are above the Product B rows. It is useful to remember these two icons, as 
they can be key for problem-solving.
STEP 4: Attach the Formula icon to the workflow. Make the following new columns, and type 
in the formulas for each new column in the top left window: 
•	 Start by selecting the arrow on the Select Column tab under the Output Column header. 
•	 Choose Add a new column. Then, type each new column name in that same field. 
•	 Below that, type the formula in the expression space, and select the proper data type (for all 
the column fields you build in this exercise, select the type Double). 
ILLUSTRATION 10.31  Alteryx Workflow after Step 3
Ch_11_Alteryx_
How_To_Data.xlsx
Query= ‘Sheet1$’
Product-
Ascending
Run
Start Here.yxmd
Start Here.yxmd
New Workflow1*
New Workflow1*
12 of 12 Fields
12 of 12 Fields
Cell 
Viewer
Cell 
Viewer
24 records
displayed
24 records
displayed
Search
Search
Input the HowTo_
10.2 dataset
Product-
Ascending
Results - Sort (2) - Output
Results - Sort (2) - Output
Sort (2) - Annotation
Sort (2) - Annotation
Type
Type
Sort
Sort
Name
Name
Show Annotation
Show Annotation
Sort (2)
Sort (2)
?
Using Canvas Settings
Using Canvas Settings
Place Annotation on the Top
Place Annotation on the Top
Product - Ascending
Product - Ascending
Annotation
Annotation
ID
ID
2
Actions
Actions
000
000
Metadata
Metadata
Data
1
2025
Year
January
Month
A
Product
600
SumUnits
Sold
60
Price
36
VCunit
17.5
Traceable
FCunit
3.5
Common
FCunit
36000
Total
Revenues
Record
Record
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
In-Database
Reporting
Documentation
Arrange Summarize
∑
?
2
3
Browse
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Arrange Summarize
∑
Select
Input
Data
Output
Data
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Select

10-40 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
New Column
Formula for the New Column
RevenuesA
if [Product]=“A” then [TotalRevenues] else 0 endif
RevenuesB
if [Product]=“B” then [TotalRevenues] else 0 endif
VCforA
if [Product]=“A” then [TotalDirectVC] else 0 endif
VCforB
if [Product]=“B” then [TotalDirectVC] else 0 endif
TraceFCforA
if [Product]=“A” then [TotalAppliedTraceableFC] else 0 endif
TraceFCforB
if [Product]=“B” then [TotalAppliedTraceableFC] else 0 endif
CommonFCforA
if [Product]=“A” then [TotalAppliedCommonFC] else 0 endif
CommonFCforB
if [Product]=“B” then [TotalAppliedCommonFC] else 0 endif
Add the annotation of your choice (small luggage tag icon) and run the formula tool (Illus-
tration 10.32).
ILLUSTRATION 10.32  Alteryx Workflow After Step 4.
Run
Create Calculated
Field Columns
Formula (3) - Configuration
Formula (3) - Configuration
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
12 of 12 Fields
12 of 12 Fields
24 records
displayed
24 records
displayed
Search
Search
Input the HowTo_10.2
dataset
Product-
Ascending
?
Results - Formula (3) - Input
Results - Formula (3) - Input
Input
Data
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
In-Database
Reporting
Documentation
Arrange Summarize
∑
Double
Double
Data type:
Data type:
Size:
Size:
21600
21600
10500
10500
0
0
0
2100
2100
8
RevenuesB
RevenuesB
if [Product]="B" then [TotalRevenues] else ø endif
if [Product]="B" then [TotalRevenues] else ø endif
0
fx
+
x
×
VCforA
VCforA
×
VCforB
VCforB
×
TraceFCforA
TraceFCforA
×
TraceFCforB
TraceFCforB
×
CommonFCforA
CommonFCforA
×
CommonFCforB
CommonFCforB
×
Double
Double
Data type:
Data type:
Size:
Size: 8
Output Column
Output Column
RevenuesA
RevenuesA
if [Product]="A" then [TotalRevenues] else ø endif
if [Product]="A" then [TotalRevenues] else ø endif
36000
36000
Data Preview
Data Preview
fx
x
×
?
Input
Data
Output
Data
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Browse
Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Arrange Summarize
∑
Formula
1
2
3
4
5
SumUnits
Sold
Price
Traceable
FCunit
Common
FCunit
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
600
700
760
740
820
900
980
1040
1220
1300
1380
1560
1710
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
100
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
18.75
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
Total
Revenues
36000
42000
45600
44400
49200
54000
58800
62400
73200
78000
82800
93600
171000
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
80
VCunit
Record
Record
4
Metadata
Metadata
Data
STEP 5: Attach the Summarize icon to the right end of the workflow: 
•	 In the top left window, select the fields listed in the left column of the table (you may have 
to scroll down to see them). Select a field by moving the cursor to the blank field to the left 
of the field name, hold down the control key, and left click on each field you want to select 
(you should select nine fields). 

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-41
•	 Click Add and select SUM. These fields will automatically populate in the lower section, 
so you will not have to type the names (shown in the right column of the following table) 
in the Output field. 
Field
Action
Output Field Name
TotalRevenues
Sum
Sum_TotalRevenues
RevenuesA 
Sum
Sum_RevenuesA
RevenuesB 
Sum
Sum_RevenuesB
VCforA 
Sum
Sum_VCforA
VCforB 
Sum
Sum_VCforB
TraceFCforA 
Sum
Sum_TraceFCforA
TraceFCforB 
Sum
Sum_TraceFCforB
CommonFCforA 
Sum
Sum_CommonFCforA
CommonFCforB 
Sum
Sum_CommonFCforB
Add the annotation of your choice (small luggage tag) and run the Summarize tool (Illus-
tration 10.33).
ILLUSTRATION 10.33  Alteryx Workflow After Step 5
Input
Data
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
In-Database
Reporting
Documentation
Run
Create
Calculated
Field Columns
Create the totals
needed for the
Income Statement
Summarize (4) - Configuration
Summarize (4) - Configuration
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
20 of 20 Fields
20 of 20 Fields
24 records
displayed
24 records
displayed
Search
Search
Input the HowTo_
10.2 dataset
Product-
Ascending
Select
Select
?
Fields:
Fields:
Year
Month
Product
SumUnitsSold
Price
Field
Double
V_String
V_String
Double
Double
VCunit
TraceableFCunit
CommonFCunit
TotalRevenues
TotalDirectVC
TotalAppliedTraceableFC
TotalAppliedCommonFC
RevenueA
Revenue B
Double
Double
Double
Double
Double
Double
Double
Double
Double
Type
∑
Results - Summarize (4) - Input
Results - Summarize (4) - Input
1
2
3
4
5
SumUnits
Sold
Price
Traceable
FCunit
Common
FCunit
6
7
8
9
10
VCunit
Record
Record
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
600
700
760
740
820
900
980
1040
1220
1300
1380
1560
1710
1640
1360
1270
1200
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
100
100
100
100
100
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
17.5
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
Total
Revenues
36000
42000
45600
44400
49200
54000
58800
62400
73200
78000
82800
93600
171000
164000
136000
127000
120000
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
80
80
80
80
80
Metadata
Metadata
Data
Add
Add
Actions:
Actions:
TotalRevenues
RevenuesA
RevenuesB
VCforA
VCforB
Field
Sum_TotalRevenues
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_VCforA
Sum_VCforB
TraceFCforA
CommonFCforA
TraceFCforB
CommonFCforB
Sum_TraceFCforA
Sum_TraceFCforB
Sum_CommonFCforA
Sum_CommonFCforB
OutputFieldName
Action
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
?
Input
Data
Output
Data
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
5
Summarize
∑
Comment
Comment

10-42 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
STEP 6: Attach the Formula icon to the right of the workflow:
•	 Make the following 13 new columns with their corresponding formulas. (Hint: Save time 
by selecting the field name from the dropdown list that appears when you type the bracket. 
This helps avoid typos, which could cause an error when you run the Formula function.) 
All new column types should be changed to Double.
New Column
Formula for the New Column
ContribMarginA
[Sum_RevenuesA]-[Sum_VCforA]
ContribMarginB
[Sum_RevenuesB]-[Sum_VCforB]
SegmentMarginA
[ContribMarginA]-[Sum_TraceFCforA]
SegmentMarginB
[ContribMarginB]-[Sum_TraceFCforB]
NetIncomeA
[SegmentMarginA]-[Sum_CommonFCforA]
NetIncomeB
[SegmentMarginB]-[Sum_CommonFCforB]
TotalVC
[Sum_VCforA]+[Sum_VCforB]
TotalContribMargin
[ContribMarginA]+[ContribMarginB]
TotalTraceFC
[Sum_TraceFCforA]+[Sum_TraceFCforB]
TotalSegmentMargin
[SegmentMarginA]+[SegmentMarginB]
TotalCommonFC
[SumCommonFCforA]+[Sum_CommonFCforB]
TotalNetIncome
[NetIncomeA]+[NetIncomeB]
NetIncomeOnlyA
[SegmentMarginA]-[TotalCommonFC]
•	 Add the annotation of your choice and run the formula tool (Illustration 10.34).
ILLUSTRATION 10.34  Alteryx Workflow After Step 6 (showing only the first three formulas)
Run
Formula (5) - Configuration
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
?
Results - Formula (5) - Input
Input
Data
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Sample
Select
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
In-Database
Reporting
Documentation
Summarize
∑
?
Formula
1
Sum_Total
Revenues
Sum_
RevenuesA
1920000
720000
Sum_
RevenuesB
1200000
Sum_
VCforA
432000
Sum_
VCforB
960000
Sum_Tra
ceFCforA
210000
Record
Record
Create the
totals
needed for
the income
statement
Calculate
more totals
needed for
the income
statement
Product -
Ascending
Create
Calculated
Field
Columns
Input the
HowTo_
10.2 dataset
9 of 9 Fields
9 of 9 Fields
1 record
displayed
1 record
displayed
Search
Search
Actions
Actions
000
000
Metadata
Metadata
Data
Comment
Double
Double
Data type:
Data type:
Size:
Size: 8
ContribMarginB
ContribMarginB
[Sum_RevenuesB]–[Sum_VCforB]
[Sum_RevenuesB]–[Sum_VCforB]
240000
240000
fx
x
×
Double
Double
Data type:
Data type:
Size:
Size: 8
Output Column
Output Column
ContribMarginA
ContribMarginA
[Sum_RevenuesA]–[Sum_VCforA]
[Sum_RevenuesA]–[Sum_VCforA]
288000
288000
Data Preview
Data Preview
fx
x
×
Double
Double
Data type:
Data type:
Size:
Size: 8
SegmentMarginA
SegmentMarginA
[ContribMarginA]–[Sum_TraceFCforA]
[ContribMarginA]–[Sum_TraceFCforA]
78000
78000
fx
x
×
6

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-43
STEP 7: Attach the Arrange icon to the workflow (it can be found under the Transform 
menu, not the Favorites menu): 
•	 In the Key Fields window at the top left, make sure all the key fields have been de-selected, 
as those fields should not be columns in the income statement table (they should be de- 
selected already, but ensuring they are de-selected is a control). 
•	 Below the section with these key fields, click the arrow to the right of Columns, and select 
Add. A new window will appear in the middle of the screen.
In this step, you will be adding the four income statement columns and the seven income 
statement rows (they are called Output fields in Alteryx):
Product A
Product B
Both Products
Only Product A
Sales Revenues
Variable Costs
Contribution Margin
Traceable Fixed Costs
Segment Margin
Common Fixed Costs
Net Income
ILLUSTRATION 10.35  Input Fields for Alteryx Arrange Step
Output Column Header
Description Field
Fields to Select
Product A
Add New Description
SumRevenuesA
SumVCforA
ContribMarginA
SumTraceFCforA
SegmentMarginA
SumCommonFCforA
NetIncomeA
Product B
None
SumRevenuesB
SumVCforB
ContribMarginB
SumTraceFCforB
SegmentMarginB
SumCommonFCforB
NetIncomeB
Both Products
None
SumTotalRevenues
TotalVC
TotalContribMargin
TotalTraceFC
TotalSegmentMargin
TotalCommonFC
TotalNetIncome
(Continued)
Illustration 10.35 contains the information that should be entered for each income statement 
column. 

10-44 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
•	 In the new window’s Column Header field name, enter Product A. In the next field, select 
Add New Description. Note that the Description column only needs to be filled out for 
this first Product A column. For the other columns, select the Description option None. 
•	 In the Fields section, select the fields indicated for this column and subsequently, for each 
of the other columns needed for the income statement. Repeat this process by adding col-
umns for Product B, Both Products, and Only Product A columns.
In the left window, find the Output Fields section, where the Description column has a 
blue highlight. In the Product A column to its left, examine the vertical order of the fields, and 
re-arrange them in the correct vertical income statement order: 
•	 Select the pull-down menu to the right of the field name and select the field that corre-
sponds to the correct row order of the income statement.
•	 The correct order is listed in the left section of Illustration 10.36 as a guide. 
New Workflow1*
New Workflow1*
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
Transform
Output Fields
Output Fields
?
Column
Column
Row
Row
Sum_TotalRevenues
Sum_TotalRevenues
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_VCforA
Sum_VCforA
All
Clear
Description
Description
Revenues
Revenues
Variable Costs
Variable Costs
Contribution Margin
Contribution Margin
Traceable Fixed Costs
Traceable Fixed Costs
Segment Margin
Segment Margin
Common Fixed Costs
Common Fixed Costs
Sum_CommonFCforA
Sum_CommonFCforA
Net Income
Net Income
Product A
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_VCforA
ContribMarginA
Sum_TraceFCforA
SegmentMarginA
NetIncomeA
7
Text Mining
Machine Learning
Computer Vision
Arrange
Count
Records
Cross
Tab
Running
Total
Summarize
Transpose
Weighted
Average
Count
Records
Cross
Tab
Running
Total
Summarize
Transpose
Weighted
Average
Arrange (6) - Configuration
Key Fields
Product B
Product B
[None]
[None]
Column Header
Column Header
Fill in Description Column 
Fill in Description Column 
Fields
Fields
Add Column
Add Column
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_VCforB
Sum_VCforB
Sum_TraceFCforB
Sum_TraceFCforB
Sum_CommonFCforB
Sum_CommonFCforB
ContribMarginB
ContribMarginB
SegmentMarginB
SegmentMarginB
NetIncomeB
NetIncomeB
All
OK
Clear
Cancel
ILLUSTRATION 10.36  Alteryx Workflow Arrange Step 7 When Entering Product B Column.
Output Column Header
Description Field
Fields to Select
Only Product A
None
SumRevenuesA
SumVCforA
ContribMarginA
SumTraceFCforA
SegmentMarginA
TotalCommonFC
NetIncomeOnlyA
ILLUSTRATION 10.35  (Continued)

How To Walk-Throughs 
10-45
STEP 8: In the resulting table, use the arrows to move the fields in each column up and down 
as needed so they are in the proper income statement order from top (Sales Revenues) to bot-
tom (Net Income). Annotate as you please (the luggage tag icon), and run the Arrange tool 
(Illustration 10.37)
ILLUSTRATION 10.37  Alteryx Workflow After Step 8
Run
Arrange (7) - Configuration
Arrange (7) - Configuration
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
How To 10.2 Workflow.yxmd*
22 of 22 Fields
22 of 22 Fields
1 record
displayed
1 record
displayed
Results - Arrange (7) - Input
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Parse
Transform
Favorites
In/Out
Preparation
Recommended
Join
In-Database
Reporting
Documentation
?
1
Sum_Total
Revenues
Sum_
RevenuesA
1920000
720000
Sum_
RevenuesB
1200000
Sum_VC
forA
432000
Sum_VC
forB
960000
Record
Record
Create
the totals
needed
for the
income
statement
Create the
formatted
income
statement
Product -
Ascen-
ding
Create
Calculated
Field
Columns
Input the
HowTo_
10.2 dataset
Calculate
more
totals
needed
for the
income
statement
Search
Search
Actions
Actions
000
000
Arrange
Count
Records
Cross
Tab
Running
Total
Summarize
Transpose
Weighted
Average
Weighted
Average
Count
Records
Cross
Tab
Running
Total
Summarize
Transpose
8
Key Fields
Key Fields
Output Fields
Output Fields
?
Column
Column
Row
Row
Sum_TotalRevenues
Sum_TotalRevenues
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_VCforA
Sum_VCforA
All
Clear
Description
Description
Sales Revenues
Variable Costs
Variable Costs
Contribution Margin
Contribution Margin
ContribMarginB
Traceable Fixed Costs
Traceable Fixed Costs
Product A and B
Sum_RevenuesA
Sum_RevenuesB
Sum_VCforA
Sum_VCforB
ContribMarginA
Sum_TraceFCforA
TotalCommon
Both Products
Sum_TotalRev
TotalVC
TotalContribM
TotalTraceFC
TotalSegment
TotalNetIncom
Segment Margin
Segment Margin
Segment Margin
Segment Margin
Net Income
Net Income
NetIncomeA
Sum_TraceFCforB
SegmentMarginA
SegmentMarginB
Sum_CommonFCforA
Sum_CommonFCforB
NetIncomeB
TotalCommon
Sum_TotalRev
TotalVC
TotalContribM
TotalTraceFC
TotalSegment
TotalNetIncom
STEP 9: Attach the Output icon to the workflow, which you will find in the Favorites menu: 
•	 Select the pull-down menu to the right of Write to File or Database in the Output Data 
window on the left. 
•	 Next, a window opens. At the bottom of the middle column, select Microsoft Excel .xlsx 
format. This will change the window so you can select where to save the output file and 
how to name it.
•	 When the Select Excel Output window appears, change the name of Sheet1 to “2025 
Comparative Income Statement.” Do not specify a range of cells. Compare your Excel file 
output to Illustration 10.6. Select the annotation of your choice, and run the Output tool. 
Your workflow should look like Illustration 10.6.
STEP 10: Self-reflection: Compare your Excel experience and solution (How To 10.1) to your 
Alteryx experience and solution (How To 10.2). You may feel that Alteryx took much longer to 
set up (and it may have been more frustrating if you were not familiar with Alteryx). You may 

10-46 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
note that Excel formatted the results as currency, while Alteryx did not. However, Alteryx 
provides valuable benefits over Excel:
•	 The Alteryx workflow documents and explains the data preparation and information mod-
eling processes step by step. The steps and their order in Excel were not documented.
•	 Alteryx clearly names and defines the calculated data fields used as calculated field variables.
•	 Alteryx workflows are excellent documentation for auditors, and are effective training tools 
for employees. They also can be rerun with the same data or different data, such as the next 
period’s inputs.
•	 New workflow icons can be easily added as branching off from any of the original work-
flow icons, and new icons can be added to the end of the existing workflow.
•	 Most accountants find it very easy to pick up, understand, and use another person’s Alteryx 
workflows. This is not true of Excel.
Regardless of whether the comparative income statements were created with Excel or Alteryx, 
the resulting insights are valuable when deciding whether to drop a product line. We can con-
clude with confidence that this data have great data veracity and value for our objective.
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Anderson hypothesized there would be a direct relationship 
between his customers’ sales volume and the positive tone in their 
product satisfaction survey comments. The analysis he would perform 
to compare the number of units sold and textual data would have high
a.	 data variety.
b.	 data volume.
c.	 data veracity.
d.	 data value.
2.  (LO 1)  Nicolas is a financial accountant for a global company that 
daily processes millions of purchases from thousands of vendors. As 
he prepares the accounts payable records for the external auditors, he 
is interested in the ending accounts payable’s data
a.	 veracity.
b.	 value.
c.	 variety.
d.	 velocity.
3.  (LO 1)  XYM, Inc. wants to change from in-house servers to using 
cloud service providers to increase their data storage capacity. This is 
likely due to high
a.	 data value.
b.	 data veracity.
c.	 data volume.
d.	 data variety.
4.  (LO 1)  Elizabeth was asked to analyze how many Facebook stories 
refer to her company. The unstructured textual data she will be ana-
lyzing has high
a.	 data volume.
b.	 data variety.
c.	 data velocity.
d.	 data value.
5.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is not likely a resource for a profes-
sional to stay up-to-date regarding data privacy regulation?
a.	 The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR)
b.	 United States’ Health Information Privacy Protection Act and the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
c.	 California’s Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
d.	 The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX)
6.  (LO 1)  When the results of data analysis do not provide significant 
business intelligence to an organization, the data is not considered 
to have
a.	 data volume.
b.	 data value.
c.	 data variety.
d.	 data veracity.
7.  (LO 2)  Which of the following presents the correct order of the 
data analyses value creation chain?
a.	 Data analysis, new intelligence, strategy shifts, value creation.
b.	 New intelligence, data analysis, strategy shifts, value creation
c.	 Value creation, strategy shifts, data analysis, new intelligence
d.	 Data analysis, data mining, data processing, data textual anal-
ysis, value creation
8.  (LO 2)  The analysis stage of the data analytics process is currently 
enhanced by
a.	 greater variety of data and combinations of data types.
b.	 new accounting regulations.
c.	 financial statement totals.
d.	 comparison to last year’s results.
9.  (LO 2)  Data mining techniques are being used by the profession to
a.	 determine the purpose of data analysis.
b.	 prepare the data for data analysis.
c.	 prepare the data and explore the data further.
d.	 communicate the data analysis findings to stakeholders.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 

Review Questions 
10-47
10.  (LO 2)  Cognitive technologies include each of the following 
except for
a.	 artificial neural networks.
b.	 data mining.
c.	 machine learning.
d.	 classification of accounts receivables’ collectability.
11.  (LO 2)  Continuous auditing involves
a.	 auditors being present at the client’s office year-round.
b.	 performing the same audit procedures each year end.
c.	 embedded software modules that capture test transactions as 
they occur.
d.	 None of these answer choices are correct.
12.  (LO 2)  Blockchain technologies are being heavily utilized for 
which of the following?
a.	 Smart contracts helping revenue recognition and lease 
documentation.
b.	 Estimation of bad debts.
c.	 Accumulated depreciation schedules.
d.	 Performance dashboard metrics.
13.  (LO 3)  AIS professionals are most likely responsible for perform-
ing data analyses to gain insight in which of the following?
a.	 The value the accounting system provides to the organiza-
tion’s internal users and recipients of information outputs.
b.	 The value the data in the system provides to creditors through 
the financial statements.
c.	 The value the data in the system provides to investors through 
the financial reporting system.
d.	 The value the data in the system provides to external auditors.
14.  (LO 3)  Auditors are embracing new data analyses options in all of 
the following areas except
a.	 classifying unusual transactions using cognitive technologies.
b.	 performing risk assessments with process mining technologies.
c.	 testing transactions with data mining technologies.
d.	 creating automatic performance reports for client management.
15  (LO 3)  Which of the following summarizes why managerial 
accountants have quickly embraced new data and analyses options?
a.	 They are subject to regulatory restrictions.
b.	 They have a long, innovative tradition of using interdisciplin-
ary data for problem solving and to identify opportunities. 
c.	 They are employees of the company.
d.	 They evaluate trends in financial balances over time.
16.  (LO 3)  Tax accountants are using emerging analysis technologies 
for which of the following?
a.	 Optimizing international transfer pricing choices.
b.	 Determining applicable tax rates.
c.	 Documenting property tax responsibilities.
d.	 Outlining responsibilities in the engagement letter with their 
clients.
1.  (LO 1)  Describe data variety, and give two examples of structured 
data and unstructured data.
2.  (LO 1)  Discuss why professionals are increasingly including 
unstructured data in their analyses. Provide an example of data anal-
ysis incorporating unstructured data.
3.  (LO 1)  Describe data veracity and discuss why it is important for 
data analysis.
4.  (LO 1)  What is data velocity? Provide examples of sources that 
generate internal and external high velocity data.
5.  (LO 1)  Explain the challenges organizations face due to the 
increasing rate of growth in organizational data. How are organiza-
tions responding to these challenges?
6.  (LO 1)  Discuss the importance of analyzing data with high data 
value.
7.  (LO 1)  Identify and describe the three types of data clouds.
8.  (LO 2, 3)  Explain the data analyses value creation chain. Provide 
an example highlighting the four aspects of the value creation chain.
9.  (LO 2)  What is the goal of process mining? Provide an example of 
how accountants are using process mining.
10.  (LO 2)  Describe the benefits of continuous auditing processes.
11.  (LO 2)  What are some of the benefits of blockchain technologies? 
What is an example of blockchain use in accounting?
12.  (LO 3)  Discuss how cognitive technologies are used by tax profes-
sionals to generate insights.
13.  (LO 3)  How have new data and technology options motivated 
systems accountants to consider alternative ways to evaluate AIS 
performance?
14.  (LO 1, 3)  Discuss the importance of managerial accoun-
tants considering data veracity as they perform data analysis for 
decision-making.
15.  (LO 3)  Identify examples of how new data and analyses technolo-
gies are adding value to professionals in financial accounting.
Review Questions

10-48 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Brief Exercises
BE 10.1  (LO 1)  Accounting Information Systems   You are a mem­ber of the AIS steering committee 
for your organization. The committee is deciding between several types of cloud data service options. What 
factors might help you choose the cloud data service that will best serve the needs of your organization?
BE 10.2  (LO 1)  Tax Accounting   Assume you are a senior tax accountant for U.S. Outdoor Adven-
tures, a company with sales operations in 15 states. Your tax analyst has provided you with analysis 
results to support the company’s annual sales tax compliance for each sales tax jurisdiction. You notice 
that the internal data used in the analysis only includes eight months of the year. With respect to data 
veracity, how can using eight months of data impact the conclusions reached in the analysis?
BE 10.3  (LO 1)  For each statement, indicate which data characteristic it best describes: volume, variety, 
velocity, veracity, and value.
	 1.	 Susan, an audit staff member, performed an analysis whereby she combined comments from 
customers’ reviews with warranty expenses for the period. This analysis is an example of data 
_____________.
	 2.	 Parker verified that he had a complete download of all accounts receivable activity data before he 
calculated the AR aging at the end of the period. Having complete data is an example of considering 
data _____________.
	 3.	 Jerome collected hourly temperature data outside his ice cream store to determine if there is a rela-
tionship between temperature and ice cream sales. Temperature data collected hourly each day is an 
example of data _____________.
	 4.	 Janel’s company has decided to move from in-house servers to cloud-based servers due to the 
amount of data that the company is collecting and storing. Movement to cloud-based data storage 
will address the company’s concerns related to data _____________.
BE 10.4  (LO 2)  Match each statement to its related term. Each term can be used once, more than once, 
or not at all.
	 a.	 Data mining
	 b.	 Smart contracts
	 c.	 Robotic process automation
	 d.	 Process mining
	 e.	 Continuous auditing
	 f.	 Textual analysis
Statement
Term
	 1.	When the client’s weekly payroll journal entry value was outside the 
defined terms of normal authorized activity, the audit manager reviewed an 
automatically generated report.
	 2.	The financial accountant obtained an electronic file of the organization’s 
press releases and related investor comments. The accountant analyzes 
the pessimistic and optimistic words to understand sentiment around the 
company’s annual performance.
	 3.	The operations accounting manager reviewed an event log that documented 
how much time it takes to complete operational steps in sales, shipping, and 
sending invoices to customers.
	 4.	The tax accountant analyzed their client’s online blog discussions to assess 
risk of tax evasion.
BE 10.5  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   A managerial accountant analyzed production data to iden-
tify a product line that could realize cost savings if changes were made to its production strategies. The 
operations team implemented several changes to the product’s production line, ultimately leading to costs 
savings for the manufacturing facility and product. Map these activities into the data analysis value chain 
for production efficiency. Link the following statements to the appropriate elements in the value chain.
	 a.	 Implement production modifications
	 b.	 Analysis of production data
	 c.	 Increase production efficiency
	 d.	 Identify production cost inefficiencies
4. Value
Creation
1. Data
Analysis
2. New
Intelligence
3. Strategy
Shifs

Brief Exercises 
10-49
BE 10.6  (LO 2, 3)  Match each statement to the most appropriate professional practice area. Each prac-
tice area can be used once, more than once, or not at all.
	 a.	 Accounting information systems 
	 b.	 Auditing
	 c.	 Financial accounting 
	 d.	 Managerial accounting 
	 e.	 Tax accounting
Statement
Practice Area
	 1.	Steven engaged in data mining as part of the risk assessment process to 
determine if there were concerning patterns in his client’s sales cycle data.
	 2.	Chi used process mining to examine systems delays and errors. Her analysis 
results help identify new policies to optimize the system functionality.
	 3.	Wynn used textual analysis tools to better classify his company’s multi-
jurisdictional transactions for compliance with new tax laws.
	 4.	Henry employs smart contracts for all new leases made by his company. The 
smart contracts will improve GAAP lease classifications and revenue recognition.
	 5.	Jamal automated the process of calculating depreciation expense for his 
company’s fixed assets by creating an Excel macro. He runs this macro at the 
end of each month to create his adjusting entry to record depreciation expense.
	 6.	John used textual analysis software to identify sentiment in his client’s press 
releases. His goal is to identify additional risks of material misstatements in 
his client’s financial statements.
BE 10.7  (LO 2, 3)  Match each statement to the technology that the accounting professional will most likely 
choose to use. Each technology term can be used once, more than once, or not at all:
	 a.	 Data mining
	 b.	 Smart contracts
	 c.	 Robotic process automation
	 d.	 Process mining
	 e.	 Continuous auditing
	 f.	 Textual analysis
	 g.	 Cognitive technologies
Statement
Technology
	 1.	A managerial accountant analyzes the comments made by customers 
when they return a product to identify where improvements can be 
made to return policy and procedures.
	 2.	An audit staff member examines sales returns data for the objective of 
discovering patterns among product type or delivery timing.
	 3.	To reduce processing time costs, the accounts payable (AP) manager 
wants the system to electronically match vendor invoices with their 
associated purchase orders and receiving reports instead of the current 
matching process performed by the AP clerk.
	 4.	An internal auditor examines patterns in employee reimbursements 
related to travel to identify unusual expenses.
BE 10.8  (LO 2, 3)  Managerial Accounting   A restaurant chain’s managerial accountant gathers data 
from customers’ mobile device take-out orders. List several ethical implications associated with the 
restaurant using and selling this data.

10-50 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Exercises
EX 10.1  (LO 1)  Accounting Information Systems   Cloud-Based Data Storage Assume you are an 
accounting information systems accountant at a healthcare company that prioritizes data ethics. Your com-
pany collects personally identifiable information about patients and providers, including data that is pro-
tected under The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). The company has 
grown recently due to acquisitions of physician practice groups, which increased the types and number of 
medical procedures performed. As a result, data volume has increased, and your company has decided that 
cloud-based storage will best serve the future data needs of the company.
Two vendors are finalists to provide that cloud-based storage. One vendor, PrivacyConcept, Inc. is 
offering a private cloud to host your company’s data storage needs. A second vendor, SkyHighStorage, is 
offering a public cloud with appropriate internal controls to separate your company’s data from its other 
customer’s data. Write a memo to the CIO (Chief Information Officer) outlining the relevant data ethics 
considerations when using cloud services and for deciding between the two vendors.
EX 10.2  (LO 1)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Comparative In­come Statement and Data Value 
You are a managerial accountant for Water Sports, Inc., a manufacturer of inflatable and hard SUPS 
(stand up paddle boards). The VP of Operations is wondering whether Water Sports should drop an inflat-
able product line that has a net-loss performance. She has asked you to prepare a comparative income 
statement for two products–SUP Model SX (10’6” inflatable) and SUP Model FW (11’ inflatable).
	 1.	 Create a comparative income statement for these two products.
	 2.	 Would eliminating one of the SUP models increase the company’s profitability? Why or why not?
	 3.	 Consider the data value of the data set used in this analysis. What alternative analyses could you 
consider to address if you should drop a net-loss producing product?
EX 10.3  (LO 1)  Auditing   Data Ethics As an external auditor for a large public company client, your 
engagement team has implemented continuous audit modules into your client’s AIS. These modules test 
and collect evidence of sales revenues transactions during the current year. Your engagement partner 
has asked you to draft a memo for the audit file to document the continuous auditing process steps, as 
well as the professional due care that will be taken, to keep the client’s collected sales data confidential. 
An incomplete draft of the memo that is missing important components follows. Complete the memo 
when more information is needed.
March 15, 20XX
Memo for the Audit Files
RE: Continuous Audit of Revenue Data & Professional Due Care Considerations
This memo documents the engagement team’s procedures to provide reasonable assurance 
regarding the client’s revenue-cycle transactions and the engagement team’s procedures to 
ensure that the client’s data is kept confidential. First, we discuss the audit procedures and 
second, we discuss professional due care considerations.
Continuous Audit of Revenue Procedures
The client has provided us access to all sales transaction data in real-time by allowing the audit 
firm to connect its proprietary analytics software to the company’s relational database. As reve-
nue transactions are recorded in the client’s database, the auditor’s software automatically tests 
and captures the audit data.
We performed audit procedures on this data throughout the year, including the following 
descriptive statistics and diagnostic tests: 
1. 
Based on these descriptive and diagnostic tests, and comparing our results to past years, abnor-
mal transactions or anomaly transactions were identified and further investigated by collect-
ing and reviewing their related source documents, such as contracts, invoices, and customer 
payments.
Professional Due Care Considerations
Since sales and collection transactions have a high data volume of personally identifiable data, 
great care must be taken to ensure that the client’s data is kept private. 
For example, 2. 

Exercises 
10-51
EX 10.4  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Data Characteristics You are the managerial accountant for 
a national chain fitness company that owns several gyms and health food stores in populated locations. Your 
company also offers nutrition and personal training services. You have been asked to analyze sales revenues 
and cost of goods sold by comparing this year to the prior year. Your data strategy is to analyze the following 
data fields and measures. For each, discuss its data characteristics in terms of data volume, variety, velocity, 
veracity, and value.
	 1.	 The quantity of products sold in the health food stores.
	 2.	 The number of memberships sold each month.
	 3.	 The percentage of members who book appointments with nutrition or personal training professionals.
	 4.	 Member evaluations about experiences with nutritional or personal training professionals, including 
star ratings and comments.
EX 10.5 (LO 2)  Accounting Information Systems   Robotic Process Automation Your company 
asked you to automate the process of performing the three-way match control in the expenditure cycle. 
­Currently, the AP clerk manually matches the vendor’s name, quantity, and price between the vendor 
invoice, the purchase order, and the receiving report. This manual process takes the AP clerk all day, leaving 
no time to perform other tasks. Discuss how RPA can automate this internal control to reduce the hours 
engaged in this task.
EX 10.6  (LO 2)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Textual Analysis You work in the corporate office 
of Sassy Seasonings, a large restaurant chain. The operations team has implemented new kitchen man-
agement policies at its most popular location. To understand whether these policies have improved cus-
tomer satisfaction over time, the manager asks you to analyze data collected as part of the customer 
satisfaction survey. This data contains the date of the review and the customers’ food and service ratings.
	 1.	 Classify the customer’s food rating key words into one of three groups: 1. Good, 2. Average, and 
3. Poor. 
(Hint: First, sort the Customer Food Rating in alphabetical order by selecting all the data, not the 
headers, and checking the box for Headers in the Data. Then, create a new column for these food 
rating groups and manually code each row by typing one of the categories for each group: “1. Good”, 
“2. Average”, or “3. Poor” in the new column. Critical thinking tip: all coders have their own per-
sonal bias, so your coding may differ from others. A good control would be to have more than one 
coder and to analyze inter-coder reliability).
	 2.	 Create a frequency distribution table using the COUNTIF function in Excel.
(Hint: Starting in cell G3, use the COUNTIF function to total each food rating into one of the three 
categories, such as =COUNTIF(D3:D91,“1. Good”). Create a total row to show the total number of 
customer food ratings by category.)
	 3.	 Next, create another frequency distribution table by month for each of the customer food rating 
categories. Create a pivot table on a new worksheet (name the worksheet “Frequency Table”), select 
the food rating groups as both rows and values, and then select Months as columns. Format the 
resulting table as necessary with column width changes.
	 4.	 Finally, create a line chart where months is on the x-axis and count of each rating is on the y-axis. 
(Hint: Create a pivot chart line graph using the frequency distribution table from question part 3. 
Select the pivot table rows where the Jan, Feb, and March data resides for columns A-E (Not the 
blue shaded header and Grand Total rows.) Then, create the line chart. You may need to switch the 
row/columns to present the months on the x-axis. Make any other formatting edits. Save the file.)
	 5.	 Based on your analyses, did the kitchen management policies implemented by your operations 
manager improve customer food ratings over these months?

10-52 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
EX 10.7  (LO 2)  Data   Financial Accounting   Process Automation You are a financial accountant 
for Water Sports, Inc. Every month you create comparative income statements for your product lines in 
the U.S. GAAP format, a repeated process which consumes much of your time. You have decided to use 
process automation in Alteryx to generate comparative income statements faster and more efficiently.
	 1.	 Create a workflow in Alteryx to automate the process of creating comparative income statements 
with the following rows:
•  Sales Revenues
•  Less Cost of Goods Sold
•  = Gross Profit
•  Less Selling and Administrative Expenses
•  = Net Income
	 2.	 What is your interpretation of your analysis results? How would your interpretation be different if 
some of your production was not sold and still in ending inventory?
(Hint: Refer to How To 10.2 for the steps to create the workflow in Alteryx. Some of the Alteryx new 
columns and their formulas will be different from How To 10.2. For example, new columns include cost 
of goods sold rather than contribution margin, selling and administrative expenses rather than traceable 
fixed expenses, segment margin, and common fixed expenses. Assume that all variable costs and the 
traceable fixed costs are production costs that flow through inventory to cost of goods sold and that the 
common fixed costs are all selling and administrative expenses. Finally, assume that all products are sold 
in the period that they are produced and there are no ending inventory.)
EX 10.8  (LO 2)  Data   Auditing   Financial Accounting   Robotic Process Automation Your cli-
ent, OneStopShop, Inc., is a public company with six independent business divisions: floor cleaning; lawn 
care; pest control; household cleaning; corporate office cleaning; and plumbing products. Your manager 
has asked you to calculate the following financial ratios for each of the divisions and compare their values 
between the current and previous years:
•  Return on assets (net income / average total assets)
•  Profit margin (net income / sales)
•  Asset turnover (sales/ average total assets)
•  Current ratio (current assets / current liabilities)
The client has provided a data set with select income statement and balance sheet data for each division. 
Because this is a task that you are likely to perform for other engagements, you decide to build a macro in 
Excel to calculate these financial statement ratios. Record a macro for the floor cleaning division. Then, 
run this macro on each of the divisions to calculate the ratios for the remaining divisions.
EX 10.9  (LO 2)  Financial Accounting   Blockchain Technologies You are a financial accountant in 
a large retail company whose supply chain partners want to use blockchain technologies to record all 
transactions. Explain the financial reporting benefits from using blockchain technology and factors that 
need to be considered for this decision.
EX 10.10  (LO 2, 3)  Auditing   Accounting Information Systems   Technology Developments 
You are a systems accountant working with your company’s internal auditor to analyze the compliance 
of your company’s authorized purchase credit card (e.g., “P-card”) transactions with company policies. 
A new analysis technology helps you easily identify the spending transactions by several employees that 
do not comply with the policies. Explain which technology development described in the chapter would 
best help you find and document where controls in the P-card process either must be improved or added 
to prevent these unauthorized transactions.
EX 10.11  (LO 2, 3)  Financial Accounting   Technology Developments You work for an investment 
manager who asks you to retrieve a large portfolio of different companies’ closing stock market prices 
each trading day. Which data analysis technology would make this daily task more efficient?
EX 10.12  (LO 2, 3)  Data   Auditing   Financial Accounting   Textual Analysis As the external 
auditor for a computer manufacturing client, you are asked to examine the company’s warranty expense 
and related accrual adjusting entry for GAAP compliance in valuation calculations. The client provided 
the following summary of warranty expense related data from the prior year (audited) and the current 
year (unaudited).
F/S
Income
Statement
Warranty
Warranty
Expense
Liability
32153
23829
$ 347,954
$ 121,784
$ 535,849
$ 241,132
$ (187,895)
$ (119,348)
–35%
–49%
Account
Balance Sheet
Account
AcctNo AcctDescription 6/30/2025 6/30/2024
Diﬀerence
%Change

Professional Application Case: Adventure Sports 
10-53
Both the warranty expense and warranty liability decreased significantly compared to the prior year. 
You asked your client’s financial accountant why there was such a drastic decrease in the expense and 
liability. The accountant responded,  “We have had significant increases in product quality and therefore 
we don’t have a lot of warranty claims these days. Customers are happier.” 
The objective was finding evidence to support or deny this explanation, so you obtained customer 
satisfaction text data about the computers from social media postings. You planned to perform textual 
analysis regarding whether there was an increase in positive customer sentiment about the computer 
product quality. 
 1. Classify the customer comments into three groups: 1 = low quality, 2 = neutral, and 3 = high quality. 
(Hint: Sort the product ratings or customer comments in alphabetical order to make it easier to 
assign categories to each comment. Use the COUNTIF function to total each comment into one of 
the three groups. Critical thinking note: Your coding may disagree with other coders, and you might 
be inconsistent within your own coding.)
2. Create a frequency distribution table that shows the total number of customer comments by group,
by month, and in total for each of the customer comment groups.
(Hint: Transform the date column into months from the Home menu. In the Number section, select 
Custom formatting, then type “mmm” in the type (no quotes). This does not change the date data, 
just its presentation, preserving your original dates. Then, create a pivot table using your groups as 
rows and values and months as columns.)
3. Create two time series visualizations to determine if customer sentiments about their computer 
products are improving or not. One visualization should use customer text comments and the other 
their product ratings. 
 4. Interpret these results and determine if any further audit steps are necessary to properly estimate 
the warranty expense and related accrual for the first six months. Suggest internal controls for the 
critical thinking risks mentioned in question 1. 
 Professional Application Case: Adventure Sports 
PurchaseOrder
PONo
PODate
POItemID
POItemDescription
POItemCost
POItemQty
POExpectedPreceiptDate
VendorID
VendorName
Invoices
InvoiceNO
PONo
VendorID
VendorName
ItemID
ItemDescription
InvoiceQty
InvoiceItemCost
InvoiceTotal
ReceivingReport
RECNO 
PONo
VendorID
VendorName
ItemID
ItemDescription
RecItemQty
RecDate
VendorMasterFile
VendorID
VendorName
VendorAddress
VendorCity
VendorState
VendorZip
VendorPayterms
 Adventure Sports is a new chain of retail stores with both online and brick-and-mortar locations. They 
sell a variety of outdoor activity and sports products ranging from water sports to mountaineering and 
camping. The company is growing quickly, currently operating ten stores across five states. These stores 
are supplied with products from a distribution center that receives all its purchased products from ven-
dors. Online sales are processed out of Adventure Sports’ distribution center. The brick-and-mortar stores 
focus on high-quality customer service and offer classes for new outdoor sports enthusiasts. The com-
pany has developed strong relationships with its vendors and its customers. Customers tend to return to 
the stores, demonstrating significant customer loyalty. 
 Because Adventure Sports is growing so quickly, they want to automate more inventory purchasing 
processes to make them more efficient and effective, with better internal controls. What follows is an 
entity-relationship diagram (ERD) showing the tables and variables involved in the process.

10-54 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
PAC 10.1  Accounting Information Systems: Use Process Automation for Accounts Payable
Data   Accounting Information Systems   You are the systems accountant reviewing the accounts 
payable process to approve vendor invoices for payment. Currently, the process requires manual match-
ing between the invoice, receiving report, and purchase order to approve the invoice for payment. You 
have interviewed the AP clerk and the financial accountant and noted that to approve an invoice for 
payment, the following conditions must be met:
•	 The invoice data must match the data included on the purchase order including, VendorID, ItemID, 
and Quantity. 
•	 The invoice data must match the data included on the receiving report including VendorID, ItemID, 
and Quantity 
Use Alteryx to build a workflow that results in two outputs: a file that is “Okay to Pay” invoices and a file 
that is “Exceptions.”
PAC 10.2  Auditing: Continuous Auditing of Company Purchases
Auditing   You are an audit senior on the Adventure Sports’ annual audit. Your audit manager has asked 
you to develop a plan for the engagement team to use continuous audit methodologies to reduce the 
amount of audit work and testing performed at year-end. Your assigned audit area is the order-to-pay 
cycle. Draft a memo for the audit files discussing continuous auditing and outlining your plan for contin-
uous monitoring of the purchasing data for your client.
PAC 10.3  Financial Accounting: Automate Procedures for Approving Vendor Payments
Data   Financial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   You are a financial accountant 
for Adventure Sports. Currently, your process for approving vendor invoices for payment is matching the 
hardcopy invoice from the vendor to the relevant purchase order and receiving data in the AIS:
•	 Purchase orders are keyed into the AIS in the PurchaseOrder table by the purchasing group after 
they are sent to the vendor.
•	 Receiving report data is keyed into the AIS in the receiving department after items are received by 
the vendor.
•	 Upon receipt of a vendor invoice, the invoice is keyed into the AIS VendorInvoices table and filed 
by due date in the hardcopy file in the AP clerk’s office.
•	 Daily, the AP clerk pulls the invoices that are due within the next few days and performs the 
following:
Step 1: For each invoice, the AP clerk looks up the corresponding PO number to the PO in the Pur-
chaseOrders table. The AP clerk verifies that the quantity purchased was the quantity invoiced. If 
the quantities agree within a 2% tolerance level, then the AP clerk moves to the next step.
Step 2: For each invoice, the AP clerk looks up the PO number that corresponds to the PO number 
in the ReceivingReport table. The AP clerk verifies that the quantity received was the quantity 
invoiced. If the quantities agree within a 2% tolerance level, then the clerk moves to the next step.
Step 3: For each invoice that passes step 1 and 2, the AP clerk stamps “Okay to Pay” on the invoice 
and adds it to the Ok to Pay list, which is sent to the treasurer who prepares, signs, and sends 
checks.
	 1.	 Match and compare the quantities from the purchase orders, the receiving reports, and the vendor 
invoices. The matched invoice information within the 2% quantity deviation tolerance should be 
labeled as “Okay to Pay.” Any invoices above the 2% quantity deviation should be labeled “Excep-
tion” so the AP clerk can follow up with the vendor. 
	 2.	 Discuss the benefits of using Excel to increase efficiencies and potentially reduce errors in the 
approval of vendor invoices.
PAC 10.4  Managerial Accounting: Create a Vendor Performance Dashboard
Data   Managerial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   As a managerial accountant 
for Adventure Sports, you want to know if there are patterns in the purchasing data. Create a visualiza-
tion dashboard to to measure the following metrics related to vendor purchases:
•	 The count of purchase orders for each vendor during this period.
•	 The percentage of purchase costs incurred during this period by vendor.
•	 The percentage of purchase costs incurred by product.

Le Grind Continuing Case: Prepare Gross Profit Data With an Alteryx Workflow
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more information about the continuing case. 
Le Grind Continuing Case: Prepare Gross Profit Data With an Alteryx Workflow
10-55
PAC 10.5 Tax Accounting: Explain Robotic Process Automation for Current Tax Rates
Tax Accounting
Currently the data needed to complete the corporate tax return comes from several 
different data sources. Each month you download the data into Excel spreadsheets and use the Excel 
spreadsheet to complete the tax accrual analysis.  Discuss how technology might be used to automate 
this process. Are there other technologies that Adventure Sports should consider for use in the tax 
department? 

