C H A PT E R 1
Data and Analytics in the 
Accounting Profession
Chapter Preview
Changes in data and technology are impacting the role of accountants in all areas of account-
ing. The accountants of the future must be agile, creative, data and technology literate profes-
sionals. They will be critically thinking problem-solvers who can use technology and data to 
drive business understanding and change. They need to “think outside the box” to create value 
using data and analyses. This chapter is an overview of how these changes are happening, the 
types of data and analytics new graduates are likely to encounter, and the skills they need to be 
successful in this changing environment.
Professional Insight: Why Does Data Analytics Matter  
for Your Career?
This chapter previews data and analytics in the accounting profession and the related skills 
needed for your future accounting career. Some quotes from leaders at two of the world’s larg-
est accounting firms puts the importance of these skills into perspective.
	
Roger O’Donnell, Global Head of Data and Analytics, in KPMG’s auditing practice:
Technology is not displacing accountants; rather, it is augmenting their ­technical 
­proficiency as well as their critical thinking and problem-solving skills to make 
more insightful decisions, reducing the risks and increasing the efficiency of produc-
ing financial statements and tax filings… But there’s a growing need for accounting 
students to learn how to harness and analyze financial and accounting data, as it 
can greatly enhance their abilities.1
	
Patty Pogemiller, Managing Director of Global Talent Experience for Deloitte:
Problem solving skills are essential in a client business like professional ser-
vices. Employers are looking for people who demonstrate an ability to think ana-
lytically and approach a problem in a structured and methodical way. Can they 
objectively analyze and solve an issue? And once they have a solution, they must 
have the ability to communicate it to others – their clients, managers and fellow 
team members.2 
1-0
1Forbes (2019). The next generation accountant. https://www.forbes.com/sites/insights-kpmg/2019/04/29/
the-next-generation-accountant/?sh=57090091ae67 (accessed April 2022). 
2U.S. News & World Report. What is an accountant? https://money.usnews.com/careers/best-jobs/accountant  
(accessed April 2022).

1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-1
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 1.1   Summarize how 
advances in data and technology 
are impacting accounting 
professionals.
•	 Data and Technology
•	 Analytics and Accounting Professional 
Practice
Match Data Analytics to 
Accounting Areas
 LO 1.2   Describe the stages of 
the data analysis process.
•	 Stage 1: Plan
•	 Stage 2: Analyze
•	 Stage 3: Report
•	 MOSAIC: Putting it All Together
Explain the Data Analysis 
Process for a Fraud Risk 
Assessment 
(Example: Auditing)
 LO 1.3   Identify the skills 
necessary to perform data 
analyses.
•	 Critical Thinking
•	 Data Literacy
•	 Technology Skills
•	 Communication Skills
Evaluate the Relationships 
between Skills and Tasks
(Example: Tax Accounting)
 LO 1.4   Explain how to apply 
a data analytics mindset to 
the data analysis process.
•	 Understand the Stakeholders
•	 Identify the Purpose
•	 Consider Alternatives
•	 Assess Risks
•	 Identify Knowledge
•	 Perform Self-Reflection
•	 SPARKS: A Critical Thinking Toolkit
Integrate Critical Thinking with 
the Data Analysis Process
(Example: Auditing)
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform.
1.1  How are Data and Analytics 
Transforming the Accounting Profession?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Summarize how advances in data and technology are impacting accounting professionals.
This is an exciting time to enter the accounting profession! New, user-friendly technology 
allows accountants to complete accounting functions, such as creating journal entries and 
preparing financial statements and reports, in a fraction of the time they used to take. Because 
these repetitive accounting functions can be automated, accountants can focus on activities 
that add value to their organizations, such as evaluating controls, providing financial insights, 
and performing analyses to aid in business decision-making.

1-2  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
This evolution of the accounting profession is also reflected in the professional certifica-
tion exams required to practice in the field:
•	The Certified Public Accountant (CPA) and the Certified Management Accountant 
(CMA) exams now include the topic of data analytics.
•	Beginning in 2020, the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) added a “Technol-
ogy and Analytics” section to the CMA exam. The IMA stated that the changes were 
implemented to “make the exam more relevant to the current job market.”
•	The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), in a joint effort with the 
National Association of the State Boards of Accountancy (NASBA), launched the CPA Evo-
lution in 2021. The CPA Evolution is a change in the CPA licensure model to “recognize the 
rapidly changing skills and competencies the practice of accounting requires today and will 
require in the future.”3 While the current CPA exam already includes data analytics, the 
new exam format, which will be implemented in 2024, will include more technology and 
data analytics in both the core and the discipline exams.
Data and Technology
As these changes to accounting professional exams show, data, analytics, and technology are 
changing the accounting profession. But what are data and analytics? Note the separation of 
the words “data” and “analytics.” While it is often referred to simply as “data analytics,” each is 
its own element–and it is important to think about them separately. Performing data analytics 
includes identifying both the data necessary for the analysis and the appropriate analysis method.
Data are raw figures and facts. Technology helps convert that data to information, 
which is the knowledge gained from the data. For example, sales transaction data will include 
the date sold, the product purchased, quantity sold, and price for each sale. We can get infor-
mation such as the total sales by product by summarizing the data (multiplying quantity sold 
by price) by product. Data analytics is the process of analyzing raw data to answer questions 
or provide insights.
The emergence of self-service business intelligence (SSBI) software has fostered the 
increased use of data and analytics. SSBI is now readily available and accessible by all business 
users. There are two key features of SSBI software:
•	It provides extended data processing capabilities for preparing data, analyzing data, and 
reporting data analysis results.
•	It is easy to use. No degree in computer science is required!
Several excellent SSBI tools are available, including Alteryx, Microsoft Excel, Power BI, 
and Tableau. These tools allow all businesses to be successful in the new data environment. 
Illustration 1.1 is an example of the SSBI software Alteryx. Alteryx lets users quickly design 
workflows that access, manipulate, analyze, and output data. Like all SSBI software, the inter-
face is user-friendly and does not require knowing how to program.
The workflow in Illustration 1.1 imports, cleans, filters, and exports results. In this exam-
ple, the user wants to do an analysis of U.S. transactions for a company. The workflow begins 
with an import of an Excel spreadsheet of all transactions. Next, the data is cleaned to remove 
null values and leading and trailing spaces. A null value indicates an unknown or missing 
value. (Later in the course you will learn the importance of cleaning data prior to analysis). 
Once the data are cleaned, they are filtered to separate transactions made in the United States 
from transactions made in other countries. Illustration 1.2 shows how long (run time) it took 
for the software to complete the workflow.
It took only 0.5 seconds to import, clean, filter, and export over 2,000 rows of data. Soft-
ware such as Alteryx can save accountants countless hours of tedious work.
The growing availability of data, the techniques and tools used to create value from them, 
and the ease with which these tools can be used have impacted how accountants, from audi-
tors to financial accountants, do their jobs every day.
3CPA Evolution. http://www.evolutionofcpa.org.

1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-3
Analytics and Accounting Professional Practice
Using self-service business intelligence tools has empowered accountants in different practice 
areas to use data and analytics to provide value-added services to their clients and employers.
Auditing
The use of analytics in the audit profession is growing:
•	Audits have expanded beyond sample-based testing to include analyses of entire popula-
tions of audit-relevant data.
•	Auditors can review entire data sets to identify all exceptions, anomalies, and outliers.
•	Data driven audits reduce the time the client spends gathering information for the auditor 
and allows more time for the analysis, making audits a better experience for everyone 
involved.
Both internal and external auditors use analytics to perform risk assessment and sub-
stantive procedures. Illustration 1.3 is an example of how analytics are used to perform risk 
assessment by showing the increase or decrease in each general ledger account for the current 
and prior year. Notice that the visual includes prior year amounts by showing them enclosed 
in a black border. The green bars represent current year amounts that are less than $3 million. 
The orange bars represent the current year amounts that are more than $3 million and should 
be investigated further. This type of analysis helps the auditor quickly identify the accounts 
that appear to have a higher risk of misstatement, so they can investigate further. 
ILLUSTRATION 1.2  Alteryx Workflow Run Time
OK
Alteryx Designer x64
Finished running in 0.5 seconds
Learn about AMP Engine
Don’t show this message again
ILLUSTRATION 1.1  Alteryx Software Workflow Example
Start Here.yxmd
Start Here.yxmd
New Workflow1*
New Workflow1*
Workflow ‒ Configuration
Workflow ‒ Configuration
Meta Info
Meta Info
Canvas
Canvas
Runtime
Runtime
Events
Events
Path:
Path:
?
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Favorites
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
Summarize
∑
Parse
Transform
In/Out
Preparation
Join
In-Database
Documentation
Reporting
Spatial
Select
Input
Data
Export United
States
Transactions to
an Excel file
Import One Stop
Shop Transactions
Remove
null values,
leading
and trailing
spaces
Filter for United
States transactions
T
F
Workflow
Workflow
Type
Type
Standard Workflow
Standard Workflow
Analytic App
Analytic App
Macro:
Macro:
Standard
Standard

1-4  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
In addition to risk assessment, auditors can use data analytics to perform substantive 
analytical procedures that support the assertion that the financial records of an entity are 
complete, valid, and accurate. Illustration 1.4 is an example of this using data visualiza-
tion, which is the graphical representation of information and data.
ILLUSTRATION 1.4  Substantive 
Analytical Procedure Example
Actual vs. Expected Monthly Rental Revenue
$1,400,000
$1,200,000
$1,000,000
$800,000
$600,000
$400,000
$200,000
$0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
Actual Revenue
Expected Revenue
Source: AICPA Guide to Audit Data Analytics (page 80).
ILLUSTRATION 1.3  Audit Risk Assessment Example
5100 Cash
$Millions
Financial Statement Line Items Compared With Previous Year
Net Assets 5100–7120 Increase/(Decrease); Net Income 8100–8510 Increase/(Decrease)
6100 Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities
8360 Fixed Asset - Depreciation and Amortization
8510 Other Expense
8500 Interest Income
8400 Provision For Income Taxes
8370 Foreign Exchange Gain/Loss
8365 Intangible - Depreciation and Amortization
8350 Sales and Marketing
8340 General and Administrative
8300 Research and Development
8200 Operating Expenses
8100 Sales/Revenue
7120 Retained Earnings - Beginning of Year
7110 Contributed Surplus
7100 Share Capital (Note 7)
6500 Deferred Revenues
6400 Income Taxes
6300 Long-term Liabilities
6140 Income Taxes Payable
5710 Goodwill
5700 Other Assets
5600 Property, Plant, and Equipment
5560 Other Receivables - Long-term
5500 Prepaid Expenses
5350 Other Receivables - Short-term
5300 Accounts Receivable
5200 Investments
(20)
(10)
0
10
3.0
12.6
1.5
0.8
3.4
0.3
1.6
1.7
0.4
-
-
(0.1)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(5.0)
(13.3)
(0.5)
(5.0)
(3.1)
(1.0)
(4.2)
20
30
40
39.0
7.5
(7.0)
(5.8)
(6.9)
(7.7)
Balance
Sheet
Income
Statement
Prior Year
Amounts
Current Year, Pass
(Changes of Less than $3 Million)
Current Year, Investigate
(Changes of $3 Million or More)
Source: AICPA Guide to Audit Data Analytics (page 39). Reproduced with permission from AICPA.

1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-5
The example in Illustration 1.4 used data visualization to compare expected and actual 
revenue to identify if any months require additional analysis. It shows that actual revenue was 
higher than expected in February, July, and December, so the auditor may decide to focus on 
those three months for additional testing.
Auditing procedures are also changing. Since many firms are investing in robotic pro-
cess automation software (RPA) and analytics automation software to automate manual audit 
tasks, auditors can focus on analysis and providing valuable insights.
Financial Accounting
The role of financial accountants is also shifting. As in auditing, changes are related to 
both automation software (RPA and analytics automation software) and SSBI software. Using 
automation software to perform routine financial accounting functions such as recording jour-
nal entries, creating trial balances, doing preliminary account analyses, and creating financial 
statements lets accountants spend more time analyzing data for insights.
SSBI software lets financial accountants perform analytics and create financial dash-
boards to support decision-making. A dashboard is a graphical user interface that shows key 
performance indicators for an organization. Illustration 1.5 is an example of the types of 
insights financial accountants can find using data–in this case, a dashboard that can monitor 
financial performance.
ILLUSTRATION 1.5  Financial Statement Analysis Dashboard 
Top Expenses
Total Revenue vs. Expenses
Jan.
$0.0M
$0.5M
Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
Total Revenue
Total Expenses
Comparison vs. Prior Year
$0.0M
$0.5M
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
Selected Account
Selected Account PY
Total Liabilities vs. Total Assets
Total Liabilities
Total Assets
Jan.
$0.0M
$0.5M
Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
Salaries and Wages
Payroll Taxes ‒ Accounting
Employee Benefits ‒ Administration
Payroll Taxes ‒ Administration
Expense Account
$   2,703,101.29
$       162,865.28
$       112,011.72
$          38,089.48
Commissions ‒ Sales
Supplies - Allocated
Other Expenses
Total
$          27,295.91
$                757.12
$                  15.00
$ 3,044,135.80
Amount
Financial Statement Analysis
2022 2023 2024 2025
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Revenue
$3.4M
Goal: $3.4M
(–1.3%)
Expenses
$3.0M
Goal: $3.2M
(–6.19%)
Liabilities
$0.2M
Goal: $0.2M
(–3.78%)
Assets
($0.3M)
Goal: –$0.3M
(+4.45%)
Gross Profit
$3.2M
Goal: $2.8M
(+13.9%)
Cash
($1.3M)
Goal: +$2.2M
(+41.73%)

1-6  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
This dashboard brings together analyses of different elements of the financial statements. 
Users can quickly see key performance indicators that provide insight into overall business 
performance:
•	The dashboard information can be viewed by year, quarter, or month using the tabs across 
the top.
•	The top row is a snapshot of how revenue, expenses, liabilities, assets, gross profit, and 
cash compare to goals.
•	The visualizations in the dashboard provide an analysis of revenue and expenses, total 
assets and total liabilities, and a visualization that allows the user to choose an account to 
view compared to the prior year.
•	Finally, the table in the top left of the dashboard provides the top expenses incurred by 
the company.
Frequently used in business, dashboards are a useful tool to communicate key informa-
tion to everyone who needs it.
Managerial Accounting
While financial accountants analyze financial statements for external reporting, managerial 
accountants deal with internal reporting and performance analysis. With SSBI software, 
management accountants can more easily use data to help identify and manage risks, improve 
budgeting and forecasting (by using more data), and automate internal reporting. SSBI soft-
ware can also help identify operational improvements and create dashboards of key perfor-
mace indicators (KPI).
Illustration 1.6 is a dashboard that provides analysis of product sales and profit for an 
office supply company: 
•	The top visualization in the dashboard is called a highlight table. The colors are on a scale 
from light to dark. Darker colors indicate higher sales and lighter colors indicate lower 
sales. User can quickly locate high performing and low performing products. For exam-
ple, the darkest color is technology sales in 2021 in the month of November.
•	The bottom visualization in the dashboard provides both sales and profit margin informa-
tion by product and subcategory. The colored dots represent individual sales to customers 
by total amount. The color of the dots indicates the profit ratio on each sale. The color 
scale of profit ratio ranges from negative 50 percent (dark red) and positive profit ratios 
up to 50 percent (dark black).
This product dashboard provides management with real-time updates of sales and profit 
information, enabling management to identify and respond to possible issues quickly. For 
example, customers with negative profit ratios can be investigated immediately.

1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-7
ILLUSTRATION 1.6  Product Performance Dashboard
Region All
Sales and Profit by Product Names
Year: All, Month: All, Product Category: Furniture
Consumer
Furniture
Bookcases
Chairs
Furnishings
Tables
$0
$5k
$10k
$15k
Corporate
Home Oﬀice
$0
$5k
$10k
$15k $0
$5k
$10k
$15k
–50.0%
Profit Ratio
50.0%
Furniture
Oﬀice
Supplies
Technology
$10,821
$13,674
$13,069
$11,813
$15,121
$  4,720
$12,924
$10,241
$  8,004
$10,371
$13,269
$23,210
$   7,320
$   9,639
$ 12,483
$ 15,442
$ 11,379
$ 11,735
$   8,960
$ 30,060
$   9,210
$ 15,525
$   9,672
$ 17,619
$23,816
$26,273
$27,263
$29,028
$27,423
$19,306
$23,264
$31,896
$30,538
$19,017
$22,883
$26,943
$12,304
$12,027
$11,873
$21,884
$  7,211
$  8,673
$16,282
$23,037
$11,938
$10,705
$31,533
$32,856
$21,565
$30,881
$31,784
$37,057
$26,862
$21,218
$20,487
$31,472
$30,201
$23,874
$27,141
$49,919
$30,646
$23,086
$36,679
$31,407
$18,006
$16,202
$37,998
$30,437
$20,893
$35,632
$22,323
$21,985
Jul.
Product Drilldown
Sales by Product Category
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
2018
2019
2020
2021
2018
2019
2020
2021
2018
2019
2020
2021
$1,072
Sales
$49,919
Sign in
Tax Accounting
Data analytics can also be used to analyze tax efficiency of business units, identify tax oppor-
tunities, and aid in evaluating global opportunities:
•	Data analytics is used to help with tax compliance.
•	Automation of data gathering for tax compliance can help speed the process, leaving the 
tax accountant with more time to do tax analysis and planning.
•	Tax dashboards can help organizations monitor real-time tax positions.
Illustration 1.7 is a tax dashboard that uses data visualization to dynamically portray 
state tax information to help tax professionals monitor the organization’s tax position. The 
menus at the top left let the user interact with the data to drill down to the supporting detail. 
Users can pick the corporate entity, the type of taxes, the jurisdiction (state), and how many 
entities to show. The visualization on the top of the dashboard is an overview of payroll taxes 
by state for the chosen entity. The bottom visualization shows the total amount of payroll 
taxes.

1-8
CHAPTER 1 Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
 Of course, these examples\analytics being used in the accounting profession are depen-
dent upon the accountant not only understanding the relevant accounting knowledge, but 
also having the ability to use the available tools. 
ILLUSTRATION 1.7 State Income Tax Dashboard 
–$1
$4,210,656
Select Entity to Display
Basic. INC
Payroll ‒ 2025
Year
2025
$0M
$2M
$4M
$6M
$8M
$10M
$12M
$14M
$16M
Payroll ‒ Top 5 Entities
Basic, INC
Enter # of Entities to Display
5
Select Jurisdiction to Display
(All)
Select Attribute to Display
PAYROLL
?
State Apportionment Data
 Apply It 1.1 
Match Data 
Analytics to 
Accounting Areas 
 You are a new hire at a large regional CPA firm called Castillo, Flowers, & Welch (CFW). With approx-
imately $94 million in annual revenue, the firm has 16 offices, 83 partners, and 484 employees. CFW 
provides accounting, advisory, assurance, and tax services:
•  Accounting services include financial statement preparation and services such as bank account 
reconciliation, payroll tax filings, and maintenance of general ledgers (financial accounting). 
•  The advisory group specializes in helping clients understand their financial position so they can 
better manage their business. Services include cash flow analysis, budgeting, industry bench-
marking, and key performance indicator reporting (managerial accounting). 
•  The assurance services include audit services and fraud risk assessment (auditing). 
•  Tax services provided by CFW include tax preparation, estate planning, state and local tax con-
sulting, and sales and use tax consulting (tax accounting). 
 CFW is considering increasing their use of data analytics. They want to use data analytics both within 
the firm and to provide value-added services to their clients.  Identify how CFW can apply data ana-
lytics in their accounting, advisory, assurance, and tax services areas, both internally and for their 
clients.
 Area 
Internal
 For Clients 
Financial Accounting 
Managerial Accounting
Auditing
 Tax Accounting

1.2  What are the Stages of the Data Analysis Process?  1-9
SOLUTION
Area
Internal
For Clients
Financial 
Accounting
Automate routine tasks. 
Create dashboards to 
monitor firm performance.
Automate preparation of bank 
reconciliations, tax filings and general 
ledger maintenance.
Create dashboards so clients can monitor 
their financial performance.
Managerial 
Accounting
Create dashboards to 
monitor projects and 
profitability.
Use data analytics to help clients better 
understand their performance.
Create dashboards with KPIs for clients.
Auditing
Automate routine audit 
tasks.
Use data analytics to perform risk 
assessment and substantive procedures.
Tax 
Accounting
Automate routine tasks.
Create analyses and dashboards to monitor 
and evaluate tax compliance and tax 
planning.
1.2  What are the Stages of the Data 
Analysis Process?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➋
Describe the stages of the data analysis process.
Regardless of the area of accounting, accountants follow a data analysis process comprised of 
three equally important stages (Illustration 1.8).
ILLUSTRATION 1.8  The Data Analysis Process
Plan
Analyze
Report
Following a data analysis process helps assure that data analyses are performed efficiently 
and effectively. There are specific chapters devoted to each stage, but we use a high-level 
example here to introduce the process.
One Stop Shop (OSS) is a wholesale distributor for convenience stores. A wholesale distrib-
utor buys products from suppliers in large quantities and then sells the products to retailers for 
a slightly higher price, keeping the difference as profit. Since its humble beginnings in 1888 in 
San Francisco, California as a general store, OSS has grown into one of the largest distributors of 
consumer goods in North America. OSS has the same goal today as it did over one hundred and 
thirty years ago–to provide customers with quality goods and fast service.

1-10  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Today, OSS operates in Canada, Mexico, and the United States. The company has 15 
regions (5 regions in each country) and 30 distribution centers. OSS distributes products from 
the following categories:
•	Baby food
•	Household
•	Beverages
•	Meat
•	Cereal
•	Office supplies
•	Clothes
•	Personal care
•	Cosmetics
•	Snacks
•	Fruits
•	Vegetables
Imagine you are an accountant at OSS and your manager has asked you to use data ana-
lytics to evaluate performance. Let’s apply the data analysis process to this task.
Stage 1: Plan
The first stage of the data analysis process is planning. This includes identifying the motiva-
tion for the analysis, determining the objective and questions to answer, and devising a strat-
egy to perform the analysis. 
Understand Motivation
Motivation is the reason the analysis is being performed. It is why we are doing the analysis. 
The “why” behind a project can vary from taking advantage of opportunities to solving prob-
lems, and its source can be external or internal:
•	External motivation: The project originates from a request or requirement by another 
party, such as external stakeholders. These external stakeholders could be investors, cred-
itors, supply chain partners, industry regulators, or government agencies. Another exam-
ple of external motivation is when someone internal to the organization, but on a different 
team, assigns the project.
•	Internal motivation: The project is motivated by a desire to better serve a client, better 
understand phenomena to gain business intelligence, or to perform job responsibilities. 
Projects are motivated internally when the incremental information gained is believed to 
outweigh potential costs involved with performing the data analyses.
Illustration 1.9 is an analysis of sales and profit for the last four years at OSS. 
ILLUSTRATION 1.9  One Stop Shop Sales and Profit: 2022–2025
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
SumofTotalSales
$ 628,166,810
$ 650,651,094
$ 779,599,949
$ 727,151,326
$ 182,498,922
$ 185,587,854
$ 229,372,260
$ 207,834,052
SumofTotalProfit
1.7%
23.6%
(9.4%)
ProfitPercent
Increase/(Decrease)
The analysis reveals that total sales and total profit increased from 2023 to 2024, but 
decreased from 2024 to 2025 by 9.4%. OSS is concerned about the decrease, so their motivation 
for performing the analysis is to understand why revenue decreased from 2024 to 2025. This 
type of motivation would be considered internal motivation. Once the motivation for the data 
analysis is established, it is time to move from the big picture to specific objectives.
Determine the Objective
Every data analysis project begins with setting an objective, which is the project’s goal. A 
clear objective narrows the analysis’ focus, and specific questions that guide the analysis can 
be developed based on it.

1.2  What are the Stages of the Data Analysis Process?  1-11
For example, the objective of the OSS analysis is to determine what factors are driving the 
decrease in sales and profits. Based on that, you could develop these specific questions:
•	Is there a single product category that has experienced a decrease in sales and profit?
•	Has there been a decrease in all the countries and regions?
Design the Data and Analysis Strategy
Developing a strategy for the project is the final step in the planning stage. There are two 
aspects to this–determining the data necessary to answer questions and deciding what type of 
analysis is appropriate considering both the data and those questions.
Designing a strategy for the data involves identifying the specific data needed and know-
ing how to access it. There are two categories of data:
•	Internal data are found within the organization. This includes transaction data, gen-
eral ledger data, sales data, customer data, vendor data, internal documents, and internal 
email.
•	External data are acquired from outside the organization. Data like this might come 
from social media, websites, weather data, government data, and maps.
Understanding the potential source of data is critical. For example, performing an anal-
ysis of accounts payable requires access to internal data sources for general ledger data and 
vendor data. If a company sells beverages and the objective of the analysis is to predict the 
sales of hot chocolate, then both internal data (transactions) and external data (weather data) 
would be used.
As to analysis strategy, there are four types of data analysis methods, each of which 
is discussed in future chapters. Illustration 1.10 offers some brief examples and definitions 
for them.
ILLUSTRATION 1.10  Types of Data Analytics
Method
Objective
Sample Question 
Descriptive
Investigates what is happening currently 
or has occurred in the past.
What were gross sales by region for 
the past two years?
Diagnostic
Helps understand why something 
happened.
Why did sales decrease in Region 1 
in the prior year?
Predictive
Forecasts what might happen in the 
future.
What will sales be next year if we 
increase market share by 10%?
Prescriptive
Helps understand what should happen to 
meet goals and objectives.
What is the most cost-effective way 
to ship our products?
The most common and easily understood analytics, descriptive analytics reveal what is 
currently happening or what has happened in the past. They are the first analytics performed 
to help understand data. Sum, count, average, median, standard deviation, and proportions 
are examples.
Instead of telling us that something happened, diagnostic analytics reveal why some-
thing has happened. The information gained from descriptive analytics about what happened 
lets us drill down further to understand why. The results of these analyses inform decision- 
making about actions in the future. Examples include anomaly and outlier detection, trend 
analysis, and pattern recognition.
Predictive analytics also help to understand and predict what might happen in the 
future. Predictive analytics use data, statistical algorithms, and machine learning to identify 
the likelihood of future outcomes based on historical data. The goal is to use what is known 
about the past to make a better assessment of what might happen in the future. Forecasting, 
regression analysis, and time-series analysis are a few examples.

1-12  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Finally, prescriptive analytics help determine the best course of action to achieve a goal 
in a given scenario. These analyses go beyond descriptive and predictive analyses by recom-
mending one or more possible courses of action. Prescriptive analytics include optimization 
and what-if analyses.
Illustration 1.11 summarizes the planning stage for OSS, including the data analysis 
method that should be used to perform the analyses.
ILLUSTRATION 1.11  Applying the Planning Stage to the One Stop Shop Data Scenario
Planning Stage
Explanation
Understand the reason for the data analysis.
One Stop Shop Example:
• Management wants to understand why profit decreased from 2024 to 2025. 
Articulate the goal, or objective, and develop
a specific question(s).
One Stop Shop Example:
• Objective: What is driving the decrease in sales and profit from 2024 to 2025?
• Specific question: Which product categories have experienced a decrease
   in sales and profits from 2024 to 2025?
Identify the necessary data and analysis methods to
answer questions.
One Stop Shop Example:
• Use transaction data from 2022 to 2025. This is internal data.
• The data analysis method would include descriptive and diagnostic analyses.
Motivation
Objective
Strategy
Stage 2: Analyze
After careful planning, it is time to begin the analysis. This stage includes data preparation, 
building information models, and exploring the data. Each is covered in detail later in this 
course, but they are briefly described here and applied to the OSS scenario.
Prepare Data
Good quality data result in good quality analyses, so preparing the data for analysis is a critical 
step in this stage. This process is often referred to as extract-transform-load (ETL).
•	Extracting is the process by which data are retrieved from a source. This could be down-
loading an Excel file or extracting data from a database or a data warehouse.
•	Transforming the data occurs when data are cleaned, restructured, and/or integrated 
with other data prior to using it for analysis.
•	Loading is the process of importing transformed data into the software used to perform 
analyses. There are many types of analysis software available, including Excel, Power BI, 
and Tableau.
In the OSS example, the company has extracted a file of thousands of transactions and 
a file with the region numbers and names. Both files must be prepared for analysis. The first 
step is determining if data needs to be cleaned. The process of reviewing the data for possible 
issues is called data profiling. To verify all the data have been extracted, you can compare 
the row counts of the data extracted to the total number of rows that should be in the data. 

1.2  What are the Stages of the Data Analysis Process?  1-13
To ensure that the data were transferred correctly, compare the amounts transferred to control 
amounts. The OSS data could be prepared like this:
•	Extract: Compare the data to the total sales and revenue numbers provided to be sure all 
the transactions are there.
•	Transform: Integrate the file with the OSS regions Excel file to get the region names for 
the analysis by region.
•	Load: Once cleaned and transformed, the files can be loaded into the analysis software.
Once the data are loaded, the analysis can begin by building information models and 
exploring the data.
Build Information Models
Information modeling is the creation of information needed for analysis purposes, starting 
from  the data collected. Examples are calculations such as net income, profit margin, total 
assets, or even break-even point in sales dollars.
Let’s build the information model using the OSS example to diagnose if one or more prod-
ucts or regions are driving the decline in profit. To analyze profit by product and region, use 
the cleaned and transformed OSS data:
•	Create a model that calculates profit margin by product and region.
•	Create a model that calculates the profit margin ratio.
Illustration 1.12 is an analysis of profit by country. 
ILLUSTRATION 1.12  Analysis of Profit by Country for One Stop Shop
Canada
$110M
$100M
$90M
$80M
$70M
$60M
Total
Profit
Year
Profit by Country and Year
$50M
$40M
$30M
$20M
$10M
$0M
2022
2023
2024
2025
2022
2023
2024
2025
2022
2023
2024
2025
Mexico
United States
It shows that profits are only decreasing for Canada and Mexico. Exploring further could 
identify specific regions in Canada and Mexico that may be contributing to the decline.
Explore Data
The core goal of data analysis is to explore data to identify patterns, trends, or unusual obser-
vations. Exploring data lets us discover, question, and investigate data relationships to suc-
cessfully execute data analysis objectives. The combined OSS data set and data generated by 

1-14  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
the profit margin analysis can be explored to find relationships, patterns, or insights that help 
explain why profit has decreased from 2024 to 2025. Sales is a significant driver of profit, so the 
sales data for Canada and Mexico can be explored for insights. Illustration 1.13 is an analysis 
of sales by country and region for Canada and Mexico.
ILLUSTRATION 1.13  Change in Sales by Country and Region for One Stop Shop
–100%
Mexico
Atlantic
Provinces
Central
Canada
Northern
Territories
Prairie
Provinces
West
Coast
Center-
Mexico
East-
Mexico
North-
Mexico
South-
Mexico
West-
Mexico
Canada
–50%
0%
50%
100%
Percent
Diﬀerence
in Total
Sales
150%
200%
300%
Percent Change in Sales
2023
2024
2025
This analysis shows there are many regions in both countries where sales are declining. 
Data   You can explore the OSS data yourself using Excel, Tableau, or Power BI.
Stage 3: Report
The goal of this stage is to determine if the analyses met the project’s objectives and then to 
share the results. Interpreting the analyses and communicating the results is a crucial stage–
an amazing analysis that does not meet the project’s objectives is useless. Moreover, if the 
results are not communicated effectively, then the analyses and recommendations cannot be 
acted on. 
Interpret Results
Data analysis interpretation is the process of reviewing analyses to be sure they make sense 
based on the project’s objective and that the results are valid and reliable. Imagine that you 
or someone else prepared the analysis of profit for OSS shown in Illustration 1.12. Recall that 
OSS’s objective is to determine what is driving the decrease in profit from 2024 to 2025. Does 
the analysis meet the objective?
•	It is a good start. The visualization in Illustration 1.12 shows that Canada and Mexico had 
declines in profit, whereas the United States had a small increase in profit.
•	However, the analysis is not finished. The next step is to dig deeper into the decreases to 
find out why Canada and Mexico had such large declines.

1.2  What are the Stages of the Data Analysis Process?  1-15
Communicate Results
The results of a data analysis project can be communicated orally, with visuals, or in writing. 
Typically, data analysis communication will include data visualizations (Illustrations 1.12 and 
1.13). Communication can also include dashboards (Illustration 1.14).
ILLUSTRATION 1.14  Communicating Using Dashboards: One Stop Shop Profit Analysis
Change in Percent Profit Margin by Product
One Stop Shop Profit Analysis 
Baby Food
Beverages
Cereal
Clothes
Cosmetics
Fruits
Household
Meat
Office Supplies
Personal Care
–60%
–50%
–40%
–30%
–20%
–10%
0%
% Difference in Avg. Profit Margin Ratio
Product
Name
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
2025
Profit by Country and Year
Profit Margin Trend by Country
0.4
0.2
0.0
2022
2023
2024
2025
0.38404
Year of Order Date
Avg.
Profit
Margin
Ratio
0.36957
0.36020
0.39142
0.37797
0.36853
0.34280
0.38447
Canada
Mexico
United States
Canada
$50M
$100M
$0M
Mexico
United States
Total
Profit
2022
2023
2024
2025
The dashboard in Illustration 1.14 communicates changes in profit to OSS’s management:
•	The percent change in profit by country from prior year (2024–2025).
•	Total profit by country (2022–2025).
•	How profit for each country has changed from the prior year.
Management can use this analysis to monitor profit. For example, it seems like OSS’s 
profits have decreased in all products except cereal, clothes, office supplies, and personal care. 
Like the other steps in the data analysis process, communication is also discussed in more 
detail later in the course.
MOSAIC: Putting it All Together
Created by arranging tiny pieces of different colored tiles into patterns, mosaics are visual 
art forms that evoke meaning and emotion. To easily remember the steps in the data analysis 
process, imagine using data to create a mosaic that will tell a story. Like the artists who use 

1-16  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
creative and logical processes to reveal meaning about the world around them through art, 
accountants use data analytics to interpret the meaning of data and reveal business insights to 
help organizations meet their goals. Illustration 1.15 provides a visual representation of the 
MOSAIC data analysis process.
ILLUSTRATION 1.15  The Data Analysis Process
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1.  Prepare data
2. Build information
     models
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1
This course will cover each aspect of MOSAIC.
Apply It 1.2
Explain the Data 
Analysis Process 
for a Fraud Risk 
Assessment 
Auditing   LocalPics (LP) is a busy movie theater chain with hundreds of sales each day and thou-
sands on the weekends. LocalPics was tipped off by an employee that some workers were stealing the 
cash from ticket sales. Unfortunately, the anonymous person did not identify in which of the seven 
theaters the theft was happening. The CPA firm, CFW, has been hired to perform a fraud risk assess-
ment for the company.
Identify the steps in the data analysis process for the fraud risk assessment, and provide a brief 
explanation of each.
Data Analysis Stage
Step
Explanation
Plan
Analyze
Report

1.3  What is a Data Analytics Mindset?  1-17
SOLUTION
Data Analysis Stage
Step
Explanation
Plan
Motivation
Discover if theft is occurring.
Objective
Determine if any employees are 
stealing cash.
Strategy
Collect sales data and compare to 
bank deposits.
Analyze
Prepare the data
Determine if the data needs to be 
cleaned or transformed.
Build information models
Calculate what cash deposits should 
be based on sales.
Explore the data
Examine the data for anomalies.
Report
Interpret
Review analyses to be sure they are 
accurate and make sense.
Communicate
Prepare a memo or presentation 
summarizing the findings.
1.3  What is a Data Analytics 
Mindset?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Identify the skills necessary to perform data analyses.
A data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically thinking through the plan-
ning, analysis, and reporting of data analysis results before making and communicating a 
professional choice or decision. Individuals with a data analytics mindset are inquisitive. 
They always ask “why” when interpreting results, they are open to learning new technolo-
gies, and they evaluate their own thinking. How can you develop a data analytics mindset? 
Focus on developing skills such as critical thinking, data literacy, technological agility, and 
communication skills.
The shortage of employees with these data analytics skills has led to increased demand 
for data and analytics education in all business programs, and there are many available degree 
and certificate programs for data analytics. While all accounting professionals do not need 
a specialized degree or certificate, they do need to develop the skill set needed to effectively 
work with data.

1-18  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Professional Insight: What Skills are Employers Looking For?
The following are excerpts from the EY Careers webpage:4
It’s clear that many of us will be working with technology that hasn’t yet been invented, 
solving problems that haven’t yet been identified. So, while technical skill sets are 
evolving faster than ever, many are becoming irrelevant or obsolete just 
as quickly. That’s why we recruit people today based on their mindset – 
not just their skillset. When you join us, we invest in your development, so you can 
continue to build the mindset and technology skillset to thrive.
What is an analytics mindset? You’ll understand the importance of analytics 
and data to your profession, with the ability to extract, transform and 
interpret the relevant data. You’ll be a natural problem-solver, able to trans-
late complex data into simple and useful insights. You’ll be comfortable shar-
ing these results with both internal and external stakeholders. You’ll also 
be committed to asking better questions to get relevant data and understand 
how to use it.
These are the “preferred knowledge skills” from a tax associate job posting for PwC: 
•	 Innovating through new and existing technologies, along with experimenting with 
digitization solutions; and,
•	 Working with large, complex data sets to build models and leverage data visu-
alization tools.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is disciplined reasoning used to investigate, understand, and evaluate an 
event, opportunity, or an issue. Reasoning is the human process of logically forming con-
clusions, judgments, or inferences from facts. Not only do employers want critical thinkers, 
but professional certification exams such as the CPA exam and the CMA exam also include 
assessment questions that test critical thinking skills. Critical thinking is the foundation of a 
data analytics mindset and should be integrated throughout the data analysis process. (Criti-
cal thinking will be explored and applied to the data analysis process at the end of the chapter.) 
Data Literacy
Data literacy is the ability to understand and communicate data. Gartner, Inc., a world lead-
ing research and advisory company, defines it in more detail, stating that data literacy is “the 
ability to read, write and communicate data in context, including an understanding of data 
sources and constructs, analytical methods and techniques applied, and the ability to describe 
the use of case application and resulting value.”5
Why is data literacy so important?
•	A study by the data visualization software company Qlik and the consulting firm Accen-
ture found that 63% of employees use data for decision making at least once a week.6
•	Further, a study by the consulting firm McKinsey & Company found that companies 
where employees consistently use data in decision-making are more likely to report reve-
nue growth of more than 10% in the past three years.7
4https://www.ey.com/en_us/careers/what-we-look-for 
5Gartner, Inc, 2018. Logan, V. Information as a second language: enabling data literacy for a digital society. 
21 September 2018 ID: G00365697.
6Qlik and Accenture (2020). The human impact of data literacy. Data Literacy Project. https:// 
thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact (accessed July 2022). 
7QuantumBlack AI by McKinsey, 2019. Catch them if you can: how leaders in data and analytics have pulled 
ahead. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/catch-them-if-you-
can-how-leaders-in-data-and-analytics-have-pulled-ahead (accessed July 2022). 

1.3  What is a Data Analytics Mindset?  1-19
ILLUSTRATION 1.16  Technology Skill Requirements in Entry Level Accounting Job Postings
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Percent
of Postings
Number
of Postings
Technology Skill Requirements
0
100
150
250
350
450
50
200
300
400
Excel
ERP
Database
Netsuite
Quickbooks
78%
69%
55%
7%
3%
We have emphasized the influence of technology on the accounting profession, the 
demand for technology skills, and that technology changes rapidly. But how do you develop 
technology skills if technology is always changing?
If mental agility is the ability to think and understand quickly, then technological agil-
ity is an awareness of the latest technological developments and a willingness to try new 
things. We can become technologically agile by learning new technology and developing the 
skills that help us to do so. In fact, being comfortable learning new technology leads to more 
agility. This “learn to learn” mindset is what employers are looking for in new employees.
While the ability to learn and use new technology is important, so is in-depth knowledge 
of specific software packages essential to accountants. Microsoft Excel is a perfect example 
of an essential skill, which Illustration 1.16 demonstrates is one desired by most employers.
Finally, tools are just that–tools. They help accountants do their jobs more effectively, but 
they do not replace professional judgment or critical thinking, and they do not make deci-
sions. In-depth accounting and business knowledge are what differentiates accountants from 
machines. Technology has just become an important part of that knowledge.
Communication Skills
Further evaluation of the Robert Half job postings reveals more skills required for entry level 
accounting positions (Illustration 1.17). Critical thinking skills are mentioned in 73% of the 
postings, closely followed by communication skills at 66%.
The ability to communicate is important for all aspects of your accounting career. Recall 
that the managing director for Deloitte stated staff members must be able to communicate 
solutions to others. The Professional Insight feature at the beginning of this chapter also 
emphasized the need for strong communication skills. The EY careers website post mentions 
“sharing these results with both internal and external stakeholders” which clearly indicates 
that communicating the results of data analyses is a critical skill for new graduates.
These examples show that the ability to read, write, and communicate with data is a skill 
that is critical for success. 
Technology Skills
Along with data literacy skills, accountants must know how to use technology to work with 
data. An analysis of over 500 entry-level accounting job postings for graduates with a bach-
elor of science degree in accounting confirms these skills are highly sought by employers.8 
­Illustration 1.16 shows an analysis of the technology skills listed in the Robert Half July 2022 
postings. Notice that most of the job postings required that applicants have strong Excel skills 
and more than half the postings are looking for ERP and database skills.
8This data was collected by the authors from roberthalf.com in July, 2022. 

1-20  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Communicating data analysis results requires specific skills: 
•	Writing clear and effective memos and reports.
•	Preparing successful presentations.
•	Creating meaningful data visualizations.
•	Telling compelling data stories.
Data visualization is particularly important because it is used to perform data analy-
sis and to communicate the results of data analysis. Data visualization is introduced in the 
foundations of data analysis chapter, and those skills are used throughout the course. The 
communication chapter also explores data visualization best practices, as well as how to com-
municate data analysis results.
ILLUSTRATION 1.17  More Skill Requirements in Entry Level Accounting Job Postings
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
80%
70%
Other Skill Requirements
Percent
of Postings
Number
of Postings
0
400
66%
31%
31%
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
Critical
Thinking
Communication
Social
Creativity
Quantitative
7%
73%
Apply It 1.3
Evaluate the 
Relationship 
between Skills and 
Tasks
Tax Accounting   You are a new tax associate at CFW assigned to work on the LocalPics corporate 
tax preparation. Match the following skills with the tasks that you will be performing. Skills can be 
used once, more than once, or not at all. Each task will require at least two skills and often more 
than two.
•	 Critical thinking
•	 Data literacy
•	 Technological agility
•	 Communication skills
Task
Skill
Gather relevant data.
Compare to prior year filings.
Prepare an analysis of changes from prior year.
Compare to similar organizations.
Upload current year data to tax preparation 
software.
Upload current year and prior year data to 
data analysis software.
Prepare a presentation on current tax liability 
for LocalPics senior management.

1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-21
SOLUTION
Task
Skill
Gather relevant data.
Critical thinking and data literacy
Compare to prior year filings.
Critical thinking and technological agility
Prepare an analysis of changes from prior 
year.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Compare to similar organizations.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year data to tax preparation 
software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year and prior year data to 
data analysis software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Prepare a presentation on current tax liability 
for LocalPics senior management.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility, and communication
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset 
Applied?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➍
Explain how to apply a data analytics mindset to the data analysis process.
You have learned that a data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically thinking 
through the planning, analysis, and interpretation of data results before making and commu-
nicating a professional choice or decision. The data analysis process requires applying critical 
thinking skills at each stage:
•	Stage 1: Taking the time to critically create and evaluate a data analysis plan will ensure 
you have considered all possible aspects of the analysis.
•	Stage 2: Preparing data, building information models, and exploring data also require 
thinking critically as you move through the analyze stage of the project. 
•	Stage 3: Finally, critical thinking will help you interpret and communicate findings in 
the results stage.
There are six elements of critical thinking to consider when performing data analytics: 
stakeholders, purpose, alternatives, risks, knowledge, and self-reflection (Illustration 1.18). 
Keep in mind that these elements are not sequential, rather they are recursive. In other words, 
the order in which you consider the elements is not as important as continually thinking 
through them.

1-22  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Understand the Stakeholders
Stakeholders are those individuals or groups with an interest in the outcome of a data anal-
ysis project. Stakeholders can be internal or external to an organization (Illustration 1.19).
ILLUSTRATION 1.19  Internal and External Stakeholders
Investors
Creditors
Regulators
Community
Clients or
Customers
Suppliers
Outsource
Partners
Industry
Analysts
Managers
Employees
Owners
Internal 
to your 
business
•	Internal stakeholders are individuals or groups involved in a businesses’ operations. 
They include an organization’s managers and employees.
•	External stakeholders are individuals or groups outside the company. Examples 
include investors and creditors, regulators, organizational partners (clients or customers, 
suppliers, outsource partners, and donors), and community leaders and members.
Purpose
Risks
Self-
Reflection
Knowledge
Stakeholders
Alternatives
Your data analyses
will have 
SPARKS
when critical thinking
is integrated!
ILLUSTRATION 1.18  SPARKS: The Six Elements of Critical Thinking

1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-23
Let’s go back to the One Stop Shop (OSS) analysis. Who are the relevant stakeholders in 
the analysis of OSS performance? Internal stakeholders would include the person perform-
ing the analysis, the supervisor, and the employees affected by the outcome of the analysis. 
If the analysis showed that the decrease in sales and profit was primarily driven by one 
region, internal stakeholders such as the employees in the region would have an interest in 
the analysis.
As for external stakeholders, investors want to be sure they are getting a positive return 
on their investment and creditors want to know that OSS can pay their debts. If profits are 
declining, both parties will be interested in the results of the analysis. If sales and profits 
are down due to a poor product, external stakeholders such as customers will likely stop pur-
chasing that product, and suppliers would eventually be affected as demand slows. Overall, 
understanding the stakeholders helps us to better understand the impact of the analysis and 
can guide our choice of data and analysis methods.
Identify the Purpose
Knowing the reason for data analyses and articulating specific questions maintains focus on 
the data and analyses steps that will achieve objectives. The importance of identifying specific 
questions was covered with the discussion of data analysis objectives. Here, the emphasis is 
on repeatedly returning to those questions to keep the analysis on track.
For example, we might discover interesting insights during data exploration that could 
distract from the analysis’s original purpose. It can be tempting to follow every lead, regardless 
of whether it will help answer the main objective and questions. Focusing on the purpose of 
the analysis avoids wasting time on irrelevant findings. It is always possible to go back to the 
additional insights after the analysis that meets the stated purpose is completed.
In the OSS case, the objective was determining what was driving the decrease in sales and 
profits in the current year. What if, in the analysis of expenses, the depreciation was found to 
be higher in 2023 than in 2024? This may be an important finding, but it doesn’t contribute to 
knowing what is driving the decrease in sales and profits in 2025. In this case, note the find-
ing about depreciation and return to it after the current analysis is complete to avoid wasting 
time.
Consider Alternatives
Performing data analyses involves many choices–which questions to evaluate, what data are 
needed, which method to use, and how to best communicate the results. How should we con-
sider these alternatives? First, identify the available choices, rank them, then choose the highest 
ranked option.
As with all business decisions, weighing the cost of performing the analysis against its 
expected benefits is good practice. While we should only perform analyses where the benefits 
exceed the cost, the costs and benefits of performing an analysis cannot always be quantified. 
In these cases, think critically about the choices and select the option that best supports the 
purpose.
Consider the OSS analysis. They want to identify what is driving the decrease in sales and 
profits. The following data and analysis choices are options for answering this question: 
•	Data: Sales transactions 2022–2025 by region, competitor data, inflation rate.
•	Analysis methods: Descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, or prescriptive analytics. 
To select the best data for the analysis, rank the data by their relevance and availability. 
Data that are both relevant and available will rank higher than data that are relevant but 
not available or data that are irrelevant. In the OSS example, the sales transaction data are 
the most relevant and also available. The competitor data would be relevant but unavailable. 
The inflation rate might be useful, but it would only be one indication of changes in profits. 

1-24  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Finally, the methods of analysis that are most relevant for this question are descriptive and 
diagnostic methods.
Assess Risks
There are many risks to consider when performing data analyses, and it’s important to examine 
all aspects of the analysis to identify them. This begins with the data and extends to potential 
biases, including our own, that may be held by the stakeholders. Potential risks in four areas–
data, analyses, assumptions, and biases–can affect decisions. These risks are illustrated with 
the OSS example in Illustration 1.20.
ILLUSTRATION 1.20  Types of Risks
Risk
Description
OSS Example
Data
Choosing inappropriate 
data, or data that are 
incomplete or incorrect.
Are the transaction data we plan to analyze 
complete and accurate?
Analysis
Choosing an 
inappropriate method, or 
applying a data analysis 
method incorrectly.
Are the descriptive and diagnostic analysis methods 
the correct methods? Were the analyses performed 
correctly?
Assumptions
Not understanding or 
evaluating assumptions 
about the data or the 
results.
What assumptions were made when collecting data, 
and are they correct? For example, are we assuming 
that we have all the data? Are we assuming that the  
2023–2024 results are as expected? Perhaps they were 
higher than expected, and the 2024–2025 results did 
not decline as we initially thought.
Biases
Mental shortcuts that can 
affect decisions.
Do we have biases that could influence the data 
analysis? For example, assumptions about the cause 
of the sales decline could bias the preparation for 
the analysis or interpretation of the results.
A habit of critically considering inherent risks in the data analyses work performed by 
ourselves or others avoids unintentionally creating or using incorrect data.
Identify Knowledge
The next element of critical thinking in data analytics includes identifying knowledge gaps:
•	Recognizing when more knowledge is necessary to complete the analysis.
•	Acquiring knowledge from a reliable source.
•	Learning how to correctly apply it to the data analysis.
Performing the analysis for the OSS case requires understanding how wholesale distributors 
operate, how profit is calculated, and how to perform descriptive and diagnostic data analyses. 
There is also a technology component, as it is necessary to know how to use the available tech-
nology to download the data and perform the descriptive and diagnostic analyses.

1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-25
Purpose
A
K
R
S
P
S
Stakeholders
Alternatives
Self-Reflection
Parties impacted by the data analysis
results.
The potential impacts guide
analysis and communication
choices.
The reason driving the questions
for the analysis.
Focusing on the purpose helps
select the best data, analysis,
interpretation, and
communication options.
Every choice should be the best
option available.
Generating and ranking
alternatives helps us make good
choices.
Consider all risks related to data,
strategy, biases, and assumptions.
Anticipating risks improves data
and analysis choices.
Proper analysis strategy and
interpretation of results ofen depends
on accounting, economics, industry,
statistics, and technology knowledge.
Applying knowledge provides
meaning to the data and to
the results.
Reviewing each choice throughout
the data analysis process (MOSAIC)
reveals what worked best.
Reflecting on lessons learned
helps improve future analyses.
Definition
Critical Thinking
Why It Matters
Knowledge
Risks
ILLUSTRATION 1.21  The Six 
Elements of Critical Thinking
Perform Self-Reflection
The final critical thinking element is investing in a “post-project audit” habit honestly and 
without self-criticism. A start-to-finish project review connects and synthesizes what hap-
pened and why. The professional development we gain by this practice, whether the project 
was a success, a struggle, or a failure, can be valuable for both individuals and teams.
When the analysis of the decline in sales and profit for OSS is complete, reflect on what 
worked well and what did not. For example, if you had difficultly downloading the data but 
eventually figured it out, then use that experience in future projects to avoid similiar issues. 
SPARKS: A Critical Thinking Toolkit
The mnenomic SPARKS represents the six elements of critical thinking. Considering each 
will help you continue to develop your critical thinking skills. Illustration 1.21 provides a 
summary of the elements of critical thinking in the SPARKS framework.
Critical thinking in accounting data analytics projects is essential because it forces us 
to anticipate impacts and issues and evaluate our choices. The results are better processes, 
improved judgments, and the ability to more provide value for our organizations, clients, and 
stakeholders. As you work through the data analysis process, apply SPARKS continuously. 
Doing so helps ensure you are performing the individual steps of the data analysis process 
(MOSAIC) effectively.

1-26  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Apply It 1.4
Integrate Critical 
Thinking with 
the Data Analysis 
Process 
Auditing   Consider CFW’s fraud risk assessment for LocalPics from Apply It 1.3. You were asked to 
identify and explain the data analysis steps you would perform during the risk assessment. Now, apply 
the six elements of critical thinking to each of those steps. Complete the last column in the table. Note 
that two elements are listed in each step, but it is possible that more elements could apply. 
Data Analysis 
Critical Thinking 
Element
Stage
Step
Explanation
Application
Plan
Motivation
Determine if theft is 
occurring.
Stakeholders  
Purpose
Objective
Identify if employees are 
stealing cash.
Purpose 
Risks
Strategy
Collect sales data and 
compare it to bank 
deposits.
Risks  
Knowledge
Analyze
Prepare the 
data 
Determine if the data 
needs to be cleaned or 
transformed.
Risks  
Self-reflection
Build 
information 
models
Calculate what cash 
deposits should be based 
on sales.
Purpose  
Alternatives
Explore the 
data
Examine the data for 
anomalies.
Alternatives 
Knowledge
Report
Interpret the 
results
Review analyses to ensure 
they are accurate and 
make sense.
Stakeholders 
Purpose
Communicate 
the results
Prepare a memo or 
presentation summarizing 
the findings.
Stakeholders  
Risks

1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-27
SOLUTION
Stakeholders
Purpose
Determine if
thef is occurring.
Identify if any
employees are
stealing cash.
Collect sales data
and compare to
bank deposits.
Determine if the data
needs to be cleaned
or transformed.
Calculate what cash
deposits should be
based on sales.
Examine the data for
anomalies.
Review analyses to
ensure they are
accurate and make
sense.
Prepare a memo or
presentation
summarizing the
findings.
Plan
Analyze
Report
The stakeholders are LocalPics management and employees, as
well as the accounting firm.
The motivation is to determine if fraud is occurring for the client,
LocalPics. It is also to do a good job for the firm you work for. 
The purpose of the analysis is to determine if thef is occurring. You
must stay focused on that purpose throughout the analyses.
Purpose
Risks
Articulating objective questions requires staying focused on the
purpose.
Risks to consider include not asking the correct questions and not
asking enough questions.
Risks
Knowledge
When choosing data and an analysis strategy, consider risks related
to the data, methods, and your thinking.
Identify the specific knowledge needed to perform the analyses. For
example, understanding the operating process for ticket sales and
bank deposits is necessary. 
Risks
Self-Reflection
Risks to consider during data preparation include data
completeness and data integrity.
Reflect on past experiences with preparing data for analysis, and
apply lessons learned to the current analysis.
Purpose
Alternatives
Stay focused on the purpose, which is to identify thef, when
building analysis models. The best way to do this is to calculate
what the daily deposits should be based on sales and compare that
to the actual deposits.
Consider alternative models. Instead of total daily deposits,
break that down into cash and credit card deposits, which is an
alternative that will let you focus on cash thef.
Alternatives
Knowledge
You could use a visualization of cash receipts and cash deposits
by day and employee to look for anomalies. Consider alternative
visualizations to determine which will best answer the questions.
Necessary knowledge for data exploration includes understanding
the visualization sofware as well as the underlying data. You also
must understand what would be considered an anomaly.
Purpose
Risks
Losing sight of the purpose of the analysis could lead to interpreting
the results incorrectly. In the this example, the purpose is to
determine if thef occurred, so ensure the results make sense in
that context.
Results could be misinterpreted when risks are not considered.
If the data is incorrect or incomplete, the wrong employee could be
identified in the thef, or the involved employee might not be found
at all.
Stakeholders
Risks
Before communicating the results, understand the audience for the
presentation and the information they need. Identifying the
stakeholders in the analysis is the best way to do this.
Using the correct visualizations and following best practices will
reduce the risk of someone misinterpreting the results.
Critical
Thinking
Element
Explanation
Step
Data
Analysis
Stage
Application
M
O
S
A
I
C
Motivation
Objective
Strategy
Prepare the
Data
Build
Information
Models
Explore the
Data
Interpret the
Results
Communicate
the Results

1-28  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Chapter Review and Practice
Learning Objectives Review
❶  Summarize how advances in data and technology 
are impacting accounting professionals.
Data and technology are driving major changes in the accounting 
profession:
•  The increased availability of data and easy-to-use technolo-
gies are changing the accounting profession and consequently 
accounting professional exams like the CPA and CMA. Data are 
raw figures and facts, which technology helps convert into infor-
mation. Information is the knowledge gained from the data.
•  Data analytics is the process of analyzing raw data to answer 
questions or provide insights. Self-service business intelligence 
tools have empowered accountants to use data and analytics 
to provide value-added services to their clients and employers. 
SSBI software has extended processing capabilities for prepar-
ing data, analyzing data, and reporting data analysis results and 
does not require programming knowledge or skills.
•  Auditors use data analytics for risk assessment and substantive pro-
cedures. Financial accountants use technology to automate account 
analyses and routine tasks. They also use dashboards to monitor 
performance and enable decision-making. Managerial accoun-
tants use automation for variance analyses, budgeting, and perfor-
mance dashboards. Tax accountants use data analytics to help with 
tax compliance, and dashboards can monitor real-time tax positions.
❷  Describe the stages of the data analysis process.
Stage 1: Plan: 
•  Motivation is the reason the analysis is performed.
•  The objective is the goal of the project. To address the objec-
tive, form specific questions to guide the analysis.
•  Strategy is the final step in the planning stage. There are two 
aspects: a data strategy and an analysis strategy. There are four 
types of data analysis methods:
•  Descriptive analytics are used to understand what is cur-
rently happening or has happened in the past.
•  Diagnostic analytics help reveal why something has 
happened.
•  Predictive analytics help predict what might happen in the 
future.
•  Prescriptive analytics can tell us what we should do to 
meet a specific objective.
Stage 2: Analyze:
•  Data preparation is a critical step in the data analysis stage, 
and the process is often referred to as extract-transform-load 
(ETL). Data are extracted from a source and transformed by 
cleaning, restructuring, or integrating with other data prior 
to analysis. Loading is the process of uploading transformed 
data into analysis software.
•  Information modeling refers to creating the information 
needed for analysis purposes. Examples of information mod-
els in accounting are models to calculate net income, profit 
margin, total assets, etc.
•  The final step is exploring the data to derive insights occurs 
once the data and information models are prepared.
Stage 3: Report:
•  Interpreting the results requires confirming the results address 
the objective of the analysis and make sense.
•  Communicate the results by choosing the best presentation 
and method of communication.
The three stages of the data analysis process and the steps within 
them can be remembered by the mnemonic MOSAIC.
❸  Identify the skills necessary to perform data analyses. 
A data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically think-
ing through the planning, analysis, and interpretation of data results 
before communicating a professional choice or decision. Data analy-
sis skills that are in demand from employers include critical thinking, 
data literacy, technology agility, and communication:
•  Practice critical thinking skills in every stage of the data analysis 
process. Critical thinking is disciplined reasoning used to inves-
tigate, understand, and evaluate an event, opportunity, or issue.
•  Accounting graduates also need to be data literate. They should 
be the able to read, write, and communicate about data in context.
•  Accounting graduates must be technologically agile. They 
should be comfortable learning new technology and be ready to 
use new technology.
•  Finally, accounting graduates must have strong written, oral, 
and visual communication skills to effectively communicate the 
results of data analyses.
❹  Explain how to apply a data analytics mindset to the 
data analysis process.
To apply a data analytics mindset to the data analysis process, con-
tinuously apply the six elements of critical thinking:
•  Identify and consider stakeholders. Stakeholders are individuals 
or groups with an interest in the outcome of a data analysis proj-
ect. They can be internal or external to the organization.
•  Identify the purpose of the analysis and stay focused on it through-
out the process.
•  Determine and evaluate data and analysis possibilities and 
choose the best data and method to achieve the project’s ­objective. 
­Alternatives are determined and evaluated.

Key Terms Review
Critical thinking  1-18
Dashboard  1-5
Data  1-2
Data analytics  1-2
Data analytics mindset  1-17
Data literacy  1-18
Data visualization  1-4
Descriptive analytics  1-11
Diagnostic analytics  1-11
External data  1-11
External stakeholders  1-22
Extract-transform-load (ETL)  1-12
Information  1-2
Internal data  1-11
Internal stakeholders  1-22
Motivation  1-10
Null value  1-2
Objective  1-10
Predictive analytics  1-11
Prescriptive analytics  1-12
Data profiling  1-12
Reasoning  1-18
Self-service business intelligence software  
  (SSBI)  1-2
Stakeholders  1-22
Technological agility  1-19
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Data differs from information because
a.	 data are raw figures and facts whereas information is the 
knowledge we gain from the data.
b.	 data are larger than information.
c.	 information is raw figures and facts whereas data are the 
knowledge we gain from the information.
d.	 information is larger than data.
2.  (LO 1)  Self-service business intelligence software
a.	 is used to write data analysis programming code.
b.	 has limited but easy-to-use data processing capabilities to ana-
lyze data.
c.	 provides easy-to-use extended data processing capabilities for 
preparing data, analyzing data, and reporting data analysis 
results.
d.	 is software that makes it easy to write computer code for data 
analysis.
3.  (LO 2)  The question “Based on current year sales, what can we 
expect for next year’s sales?” would be answered using which type of 
data analysis method?
a.	 Descriptive
b.	 Diagnostic
c.	 Predictive
d.	 Prescriptive
4.  (LO 2)  The question “Why are costs rising in business unit A?” 
would be answered using which type of data analysis method?
a.	 Descriptive
b.	 Diagnostic
c.	 Predictive
d.	 Prescriptive
5.  (LO 2)  Understanding why we are performing data analysis, what 
the goal is, and which data to use is part of which stage of data analysis?
a.	 Extraction stage
b.	 Plan stage
c.	 Analyze stage
d.	 Report stage
6.  (LO 2)  The data analysis process stage in which information mod-
els are built is the
a.	 extraction stage.
b.	 plan stage.
c.	 analyze stage.
d.	 report stage.
7.  (LO 2)  Which activities are performed during the reporting stage 
of data analysis?
a.	 Data cleaning and analysis
b.	 Data preparation and communication
c.	 Data analysis and interpretation
d.	 Data interpretation and communication
8.  (LO 2)  The analyze stage of the data analytics process includes 
which of the following tasks?
a.	 Interpreting the analysis findings.
b.	 Communicating the analysis results.
c.	 Cleaning the data set to remove errors and omissions.
d.	 Planning the data analysis strategy.
9.  (LO 3)  Disciplined reasoning used to investigate, understand, and 
evaluate an event, opportunity, or an issue is considered
a.	 critical thinking.
b.	 data literacy.
c.	 data analysis.
d.	 process thinking.
10.  (LO3)  A mindset of being aware of the newest technology and a 
willingness to try new things is referred to as
a.	 analytical thinking.
b.	 critical thinking.
c.	 data literacy.
d.	 technological agility.
11.  (LO 3)  The ability to prepare effective data visualizations for the 
results of an analysis is part of which skill set?
a.	 Analytical thinking
b.	 Communication
c.	 Statistical ability
d.	 Logical thinking
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
Multiple Choice Questions  1-29
•  Identify risk to mitigate problems that may occur due to data 
risks, analysis risks, incorrect assumptions, and biases.
•  Acquire and apply the knowledge that is necessary for project 
success.
•  Self-reflection on the planning, processes, and outcomes from 
prior projects can be applied to future projects.
The mnemonic SPARKS is a tool to remember the six critical thinking 
elements.

1-30  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
12.  (LO 4)  Professional critical thinking elements in data analysis 
include
a.	 understanding stakeholders, identifying the purpose, con-
sidering alternatives, assessing risks, identifying knowledge 
needed, and self-reflecting.
b.	 understanding stakeholders, considering alternatives, and 
understanding the desired results of analysis and actively pur-
suing that outcome.
c.	 Understanding stakeholders, assessing risks, identifying 
knowledge needed, and following instructions without ques-
tioning them.
d.	 understanding stakeholders, identifying the purpose, and 
following data analysis best practices to achieve the desired 
result.
13.  (LO 4)  Who is an internal stakeholder for a manufacturing 
company?
a.	 The company’s bank
b.	 The company’s customers
c.	 The SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission)
d.	 The company’s CFO (chief financial officer)
14.  (LO 4)  Which of these is a risk in data analysis?
a.	 A client that wants a particular outcome
b.	 Data that is current and relevant
c.	 You have performed this analysis before
d.	 You have used the analysis software before
15.  (LO 4)  Which element of critical thinking helps avoid wasting 
time on irrelevant analyses or findings?
a.	 Understanding the stakeholders
b.	 Identifying the purpose
c.	 Considering alternatives
d.	 Identifying the knowledge necessary for the analysis
1.  (LO 1)  How are the CPA exam and CMA exam changing due to 
shifts in the accounting profession?
2.  (LO 1)  Match the practice area of accounting to the changes driven 
by data and technology. You may use more than one accounting area. 
a.	 Auditing
b.	 Financial accounting
c.	 Managerial accounting
d.	 Tax accounting
Changes
Accounting  
Practice Area
1. Ability to use entire data sets to identify 
exceptions, anomalies, and outliers
2. Automation of manual processes
3. Automation of journal entries
4. Risk identification
5. Forecasting
6. Compliance reporting
3.  (LO 1)  Discuss the difference between data and information.
4.  (LO 2)  Match the type of data analytic method with the purpose 
for the analysis:
a.	 Descriptive
b.	 Diagnostic
c.	 Predictive
d.	 Prescriptive
Purpose
Method
1. Understanding what is happening 
currently and what has happened in  
the past.
2. Understanding what should happen to 
meet goals and objectives.
3. Understanding what might happen in the 
future.
4. Understanding why something happened.
5.  (LO 2)  Discuss the three steps in the planning stage of the data 
analysis process.
6.  (LO 2)  Preparing data for analysis is often referred to as ETL 
(extract-transform-load). Describe each aspect of the ETL process.
7.  (LO 2)  Match the data analysis process stages to the examples.
a.	 Plan    b.	 Analyze    c.  Report
Example
Data Analysis 
Process Stage
1. Develop a model to calculate contribution 
margin.
2. Get data from a database.
3. Upload data into analysis software.
4. Determine the objective of the analysis.
5. Create a forecast of net income.
6. Identify the data needed for analysis.
7. Identify relationships within the data.
8. Create a visualization to show the results 
of the analyses.
9. Identify sales patterns.
8.  (LO 3)  Discuss the meaning of having a data analytics mindset.
9.  (LO 3)  Explain the importance of communication skills when 
reporting the results of data analysis.
Review Questions

Brief Exercises  1-31
10.  (LO 3)  Match the data analysis skill to its definition.
a.	 Critical thinking
b.	 Data literacy
c.	 Technology agility
d.	 Communication
Definition
Skill
1. Willingness to try new technology.
2. The ability to read, write, and 
communicate data in context.
3. Ability to create effective data 
visualizations.
4. Disciplined reasoning used to investigate, 
understand, and evaluate an event, 
opportunity, or an issue.
11.  (LO 4)  List and describe the six elements of critical thinking.
12.  (LO 4)  Give an example and explain how one of the elements of 
critical thinking can be applied to the planning stage of the data anal-
ysis process.
13.  (LO 4)  Give an example and explain how one of the elements of 
critical thinking can be applied to the analyzing stage of the data anal-
ysis process.
14.  (LO 4)  Give an example and explain how one of the elements of 
critical thinking can be applied to the reporting stage of the data anal-
ysis process.
Brief Exercises
BE 1.1  (LO 1)  Auditing   The following analysis of sales by month and quarter for 2025 has been pre-
pared for One Stop Shop.
$0
$20,000,000
$40,000,000
$80,000,000
$100,000,000
$120,000,000
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Qtr1
Apr.
May
Jun.
Qtr2
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Qtr3
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Qtr4
$60,000,000
Total Sales by Month and Quarter
2025
Total
	 1.	 How might an auditor use this analysis?
	 2.	 Identify any months that might warrant additional investigation.
BE 1.2  (LO1)  Data   Financial Accounting   Examine the available data to do the following:
	 1.	 Identify total sales, total costs, and total profit.
	 2.	 Discuss how a financial accountant might use this information to create a dashboard.
	 3.	 What additional information would a financial accountant find useful in a dashboard?
BE 1.3  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Denton Hospitality is a hotel chain located in the southwest. 
Denton wants to know four things:
	 1.	 Which hotels have the highest revenue?
	 2.	 Are there any hotels that have unusual revenue?
	 3.	 Can we estimate expenses for the next year?
	 4.	 How long does it take, on average, to clean a room?
For each request, identify the appropriate data analysis method to answer the question.

1-32  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
BE 1.4  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Super Scooters manufactures and sells stand-on motorized 
scooters. They are considering expanding operations into Canada. They have asked you to analyze the 
data for their current U.S. operations and to prepare an analysis for expansion into Canada.
	 1.	 What data will be useful for your analysis? List both financial and non-financial data.
	 2.	 For each data suggested, is the data internal or external?
BE 1.5  (LO 2)  Financial Accounting   Best Bakes Bakery has a target of an average 42% profit margin 
on all sales. They are concerned that they may have some customers where the profit margin target is 
not being met. 
	 1.	 Why are you performing the analysis?
	 2.	 What is the goal of the analysis?
	 3.	 How are you going to achieve the analysis?
BE 1.6  (LO 2)  Financial Accounting   You are a financial accountant for Best Bakes Bakery asked to 
interpret an analysis of sales by product. The objective is to determine which products are increasing and 
decreasing in profit. You were given the following visualization.
Blueberry Scone
Caramel Apple
Cinnamon Bun
Poppyseed Bagel
Total Profit
$0
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
$5,000
$6,000
2022
2023
2024
2025
	 1.	 Does this analysis meet the objective of helping Best Bakes Bakery to determine if profits are increas-
ing or decreasing for each product?
	 2.	 What are some ways you could communicate your interpretation?
BE 1.7  (LO 3)  Auditing   Find a recent job posting for an entry-level auditor in a public accounting 
firm. List the responsibilities and qualifications required for the position. Highlight responsibilities and 
qualifications that relate to critical thinking, data literacy, technology skills, and communication skills.
BE 1.8  (LO 3)  Tax Accounting   Find a recent job posting for a tax accounting position in a public 
accounting firm, company, or non-for-profit organization. List the responsibilities and qualifications 
required for the position. Highlight responsibilities and qualifications that relate to critical thinking, data 
literacy, technology skills and communication skills.
BE 1.9  (LO 3)  Find a recent job posting for an accounting position (financial, managerial, or internal 
audit) in a company or not-for-profit organization. List the responsibilities and qualifications required 
for the position. Highlight responsibilities and qualifications that relate to critical thinking, data literacy, 
technology skills, and communication skills.
BE 1.10  (LO 4)  Indicate whether the party is an internal (I) or an external (E) stakeholder:
	 1.	 CEO, CFO, or sales manager
	 2.	 Clients or customers
	 3.	 Employees
	 4.	 Suppliers
	 5.	 Outsource partners
	 6.	 Investors
	 7.	 Creditors and lenders
	 8.	 Regulators at state and federal agencies

Exercises  1-33
Exercises
EX 1.1  (LO 2, 4)  Managerial Accounting   Apply Critical Thinking A retail bookstore near a large 
university sells books, college-branded apparel, and gifts. Store management wants to understand which 
sales mix of books, apparel and gifts would result in the highest net income.
	 1.	 List two external stakeholders who may be impacted by the analysis.
	 2.	 The objective is to determine which combination of products could result in the best net income 
maximization. Provide three specific questions you could ask of the data.
	 3.	 Create and compare at least two different data alternatives and two analysis options for this objec-
tive. Explain why you selected the data and the analysis options.
	 4.	 Provide a data risk and an analysis risk example for the options you chose.
	 5.	 List three accounting concepts that can help you perform the to the data analysis.
	 6.	 Identify at least one way to leverage your new intelligence about the best-selling product mix.
EX 1.2  (LO 2, 4)  Auditing   Identify Stakeholders, Objectives, and Risks You are conducting an 
independent audit of the financial statements for a large car dealer company. They have multiple loca-
tions in various cities across the region. You have been assigned the task of recalculating the company’s 
payroll commission expense, which is reported as selling, general, and administrative expenses on the 
company’s financial statements.
	 1.	 List two external stakeholders who may be impacted by the audit findings.
	 2.	 Your objective is to determine whether the financial statements are reasonable representations of 
the company’s operations and financial position. Assume you were provided the company’s monthly 
payroll commission payouts for the fiscal year under audit. Develop three specific questions you 
could ask to achieve your objective.
	 3.	 Discuss one risk to critical thinking related to your examination of payroll commission pay-out data.
	 4.	 Identify at least one useful insight to leverage when working with other audit clients.
BE 1.11  (LO 4)  Match the definitions to the critical thinking elements.
	 a.	 The reason for the analysis.
	 b.	 A review of what worked and what did not.
	 c.	 Different options that are considered and 
ranked.
	 d.	 The parties potentially impacted by the results.
	 e.	 The concepts that add meaning to the data.
	 f.	 Obstacles and challenges to our thinking or 
analyses.
Critical Thinking Element
Definition
	 1.	Stakeholders
	 2.	Purpose
	 3.	Alternatives
	 4.	Risks
	 5.	Knowledge
	 6.	Self-reflection

1-34  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
EX 1.3  (LO 2, 4)  Financial Accounting   Apply the Data Analysis Process Bonnie, the CFO for a 
large retail company, has asked you to perform data analysis to identify obsolete inventory and to cal-
culate an inventory obsolescence reserve for the year-end financial statements. Inventory is one of the 
largest assets on your balance sheet. Complete the chart. 
Stage
Data Analysis Process 
Response
Plan
1. What is your motivation for performing 
the analysis?
2. What is the objective of your data 
analysis project?
3. What is your strategy to achieve the 
objective?
Analyze
4. What would you consider in the data 
set before you begin your analysis?
5. What information model might you use 
to satisfy the objective?
6. Assume your analysis identified several 
items in inventory that have not sold 
over the last year. How would you 
explore initial results?
Report
7. Assume your analysis results in a 
calculation of inventory obsolescence 
as of year-end. What would you 
consider as you interpret these results?
8. How would you communicate your 
results to the CFO?
EX 1.4  (LO 2, 4)  Accounting Information Systems   Auditing   Critical Thinking and the Data 
Analysis Process You are working in the internal audit department of a publicly traded company. This 
is the first year the company must analyze and report on the operating effectiveness of internal controls 
over financial reporting.
Hito, the internal audit director, asks you to test controls associated with the authorization and 
authentication of users into the company’s information system. Specifically, you are asked to identify 
whether any terminated employees continue to have access to login to the information system. You plan 
to request files from human resources and information technology groups. For each step in the data anal-
ysis (MOSAIC) process, use the critical thinking framework by applying at least two critical thinking 
elements. 
Stage
Data Analysis Process
Critical Thinking
Plan
1. Motivation
2. Objective
3. Strategy
Analyze
4. Prepare data
5. Build models
6. Explore data
Report
7. Interpret
8. Communicate

EX 1.5  (LO 2, 4)  Auditing   Critical Thinking and the Data Analysis Process You are a first-year 
external auditor assigned to a client whose primary business activity is breeding and raising bison. They 
sell the meat to grocery stores and distributors, who then sell to restaurants. You will audit the company’s 
accounts receivable allowance for doubtful accounts. The client has prepared a schedule that indicates 
they have over 200 customers with outstanding receivables balances as of year-end. Your audit senior 
indicated that the primary assertion on which you should focus is valuation of the allowance for doubtful 
accounts. You must perform an analysis to recalculate the company’s recorded balance.
For each step in the data analysis process, use the critical thinking framework by applying at least 
two critical thinking elements. 
Stage
Data Analysis Process
Critical Thinking 
Plan
1. Motivation
2. Objective
3. Strategy
Analyze
4. Prepare data
5. Build models
6. Explore data
Report
7. Interpret
8. Communicate
EX 1.6  (LO 2, 4)  Financial Accounting   Critical Thinking and the Data Analysis Process You 
are a financial analyst working for a major airline company’s accounting department. The CFO wants to 
understand the company’s debt solvency (meaning their ability to meet their debt obligations) compared 
to that of its primary competitors (Southwest, Delta, American, and Alaska Air). You have been tasked 
with the calculation, interpretation, and evaluation of the following ratios:
Debt to equity: Total liabilities/Stockholders’ equity
Debt to assets: Total liabilities/Total assets
Times interest earned: (Net income + Interest expense + Tax expense)/Interest expense
For each step in the data analysis process, use the critical thinking framework by applying at least two 
critical thinking elements.
Stage
Data Analysis Process
Critical Thinking 
Plan
1. Motivation
2. Objective
3. Strategy
Analyze
4. Prepare data
5. Build models
6. Explore data
Report
7. Interpret
8. Communicate
Exercises  1-35

1-36  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
EX 1.7  (LO 2, 4)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Critical Thinking and the 
Data Analysis Process You are a financial analyst working for a manufacturing company that produces 
and sells two very different products. The vice president of operations, Jerome, has asked you to prepare 
an analysis to explain why the company’s total sales revenues decreased,while net income increased. He 
prepared the following preliminary analysis for you.
Sales
Revenues
Net
Income
$0
$50,000,000
$100,000,000
$150,000,000
2024
2025
$200,000,000
$250,000,000
Net Income Trend Compared to Sales
Revenues Trend
Years
Briefly describe what you would suggest for each step in the data analysis process, then use critical think-
ing by describing at least two critical thinking elements for each step you listed.
Stage
Data Analysis Process 
Brief Description
Critical Thinking 
Plan
1. Motivation
2. Objective
3. Strategy
Analyze
4. Prepare data
5. Build models
6. Explore data
Report
7. Interpret
8. Communicate
EX 1.8  (LO 2, 4)  Tax Accounting   Critical Thinking and the Data Analysis Process You work for 
a nonprofit in Washington D.C. whose mission is to understand and document how changes in the fed-
eral tax code cause changes in predicted federal tax revenues. Your group is currently considering several 
elements of the newly proposed tax reform bill. You and your team want to predict tax revenue changes if 
the tax rates were decreased by 1% for the middle brackets of taxable income for single filing individuals 
(not those who file jointly as married, separately as married, or heads of households). The tax rates you 
are considering are as follows:
Tax Rate
Taxable Income Bracket
Tax Owed
22%
$40,126 to $85,525
$4,617.50 + 22% on income over $40,125
24%
$85,526 to $163,300
$14,605.50 + 24% on income over $85,525
32%
$163,301 to $207,350
$33,271.50 + 32% on income over $163,300
Briefly describe what you would suggest for each step in the data analysis process, then apply two critical 
thinking elements to each step listed.
Stage
Data Analysis Process 
Brief Description
Critical Thinking 
Plan
1. Motivation
2. Objective
3. Strategy
Analyze
4. Prepare data
5. Build models
6. Explore data
Report
7. Interpret
8. Communicate

Professional Application Case: Little Tots Daycare  1-37
Professional Application Case: Little Tots Daycare
Little Tots Day Care operates in Roswell, Georgia, a suburb of Atlanta. It is a mid-sized childcare facility 
that serves children from three months to six years of age. The facility prides itself on providing a safe and 
secure environment where parents feel their children are cared for and safe. The market for childcare is 
very competitive, with just over 20 licensed facilities in Roswell. Little Tots opened in June of 2023 and 
has seen steady growth since then. As the following visual shows, they operated at a loss during the first 
year they opened but have increased profit significantly in the last year.
($40,000)
$0
$40,000
$60,000
($20,000)
$20,000
$80,000
$160,000
Profit (Loss) Before
Interest and Taxes:
2023-2025
2023
2024
2025
$140,000
$120,000
$100,000
The income statement for the past three years shows that the first year ended with a loss of $21,579, but 
by 2025 they earned a profit, before interest and taxes, of $138,654.
Income Statement  
Year Ended December 31
2023
2024
2025
Income:
Sales
$287,787.50
$566,527.50
$742,214.00
Direct Cost of Sales
   ($8,586.60)
 ($17,600.00)
 ($23,760.00)
Gross Margin
$279,200.90
$548,927.50
$718,454.00
Expenses
Payroll
$235,200.00
$371,840.00
$420,000.00
Sales and Marketing and Other Expenses
$5,000.00
$5,000.00
$5,000.00
Leased Equipment
$1,900.00
$2,100.00
$2,300.00
Certifications & Inspections
$2,500.00
$2,500.00
$2,500.00
Utilities
$1,900.00
$20,000.00
$22,000.00
Insurance
$3,000.00
$35,000.00
$40,000.00
Rent
$16,000.00
$25,000.00
$25,000.00
Payroll Taxes
$35,280.00
$55,776.00
$63,000.00
Other
            $0.00
            $0.00
            $0.00
Total Operating Expenses
$300,780.00
$517,216.00
$579,800.00
Profit (Loss) Before Interest and Taxes
 ($21,579.10)
   $31,711.50
$138,654.00
...

1-38  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
The balance sheet for Little Tots shows a steady growth in total assets. Total liabilities have remained 
relatively flat all three years.
Balance Sheet  
December 31
2023
2024
2025
Assets
Current Assets
Cash
$44,676
$45,065
$162,840
Other Current Assets
$0
$25,000
$150,000
Total Current Assets
$44,676
$70,065
$312,840
Long-term Assets
Long-term Assets
          $0
          $0
            $0
Total Assets
$44,676
$70,065
$312,840
Liabilities and Capital
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable
$6,455
$10,133
$17,311
Current Borrowing
$0
$0
$0
Other Current Liabilities
$0
$0
$0
Subtotal Current Liabilities
$6,455
$10,133
$17,311
Long-term Liabilities
$22,800
$12,800
$2,800
Total Liabilities
$29,255
$22,933
$20,111
Paid-in Capital
$40,000
$40,000
$40,000
Retained Earnings
($3,000)
($24,579)
$114,075
Earnings
($21,579)
$31,711
$138,654
Total Capital
$15,421
$47,132
$292,729
Total Liabilities and Capital
$44,676
$70,065
$312,840
Little Tots provides two types of services: full-time and drop-in childcare. Full-time services are charged 
monthly and drop-in services are charged by the hour. The next visualization shows the number of chil-
dren per year for each service.
640
1
2
3
Number of Children per Year
0
4,500
3,500
4,000
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
1,875
1,200
3,500
1,500
4,000
Full-Time Child ‒ Month
Drop-In Child ‒ Hour
Consider how data analytics can be used at Little Tots Daycare in each of the following scenarios.

PAC 1.1  Auditing: Risk Assessment and Audit Procedures 
Data   Auditing   Your audit team has been given a data set of all transactions for the year 2025. A 
sample of the file is provided.
fx
1
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
B
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
F-01251
D-01251
D-01252
F-01252
F-01253
D-01253
D-01254
ReceiptNumber
1/15/2025
1/16/2025
1/17/2025
1/18/2025
1/19/2025
1/20/2025
1/21/2025
Date
Full Time
Drop in
Drop in
Full Time
Full Time
Drop in
Drop in
Service
Teri
Esther
Brandy
Hubert
Rebecca
Eula
Alexander
CustomerFirstName
Park
Rodgers
Morales
Roberts
Spencer
Pierce
Hoffman
CustomerLastName
Nicholas
Lucia
Krystal
Trevor
Patricia
Alec
Cassy
ChildsFirstName
Park
Salazar
Morales
Roberts
Spencer
Luciano
Hoﬀman
ChildsLastName
$ 125.00
$   45.00
$   60.00
$ 125.00
$ 125.00
$   30.00
$   55.00
Amount
AutoSave
Oﬀ
Based on the sample data set, discuss how the audit team might use the data provided to perform each 
of the following procedures:
	 1.	 Audit risk assessment
	 2.	 Substantive analytical procedures
PAC 1.2  Financial Accounting: Understand Financial Performance
Data   Financial Accounting   You have been asked to suggest how data analytics can be used to help 
better understand the financial position of the company.
	 1.	 Discuss how Little Tots can use SSBI software to provide information about company performance.
	 2.	 What are some financial statement analysis items that Little Tots should consider for a financial 
dashboard?
	 3.	 Sketch a sample of what a financial dashboard might look like for Little Tots. Consider the data that 
is available when determining what to include in your dashboard.
PAC 1.3  Managerial Accounting: Understand Operational Performance
Data   Managerial Accounting   You are preparing the next year budget plan, as well as an analysis 
to determine which city Little Tots should consider for expansion.
Atlanta
Columbus
Augusta
Macon
Savannah
Athens
Sandy Springs
City
State
Country Population
PercentageFive
YearsOldAndUnder
NumberOfChildren
FiveYrsOrUnder
South Fulton
Roswell
Johns Creek
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
Georgia
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
498,715
206,922
202,081
157,346
147,780
127,315
108,080
107,436
92,833
82,453
5.4%
7.2%
6.9%
5.0%
6.4%
5.3%
5.9%
7.1%
7.1%
4.7%
26,931
14,898
13,944
7,867
9,458
6,748
6,377
7,628
6,591
3,875
$   59,948
$   46,408
$   42,592
$   32,161
$   43,307
$   65,919
$   99,726
$ 122,514
$   38,311
$   78,613
MedianIncome
	 1.	 Discuss how the managerial accounting team might use the data provided to determine a city in 
which they could open another daycare location.
	 2.	 Identify data that would be useful for a management accounting dashboard.
	 3.	 What type of data analytic method would you use to prepare the budget for the next year?
Professional Application Case: Little Tots Daycare  1-39

1-40  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
PAC 1.4  Tax Accounting: Use Tax Data for Decision-Making 
You are helping the management accounting department with their analysis to determine a potential 
city for opening another location. You have gathered data from the IRS that shows information about tax 
returns filed in each zip code in the state of Georgia. A list of the data available for analysis follows. If 
an item would be useful for your analysis, indicate whether you would use the number of returns or the 
dollar amount in your analysis. Then, explain why you chose that specific item.
Data Available
Number 
of Returns
Dollar 
Amount
Reason
Zip Code
Size Of Adjusted Gross Income:
  $1 under $25,000
  $25,000 under $50,000
  $50,000 under $75,000
  $75,000 under $100,000
  $100,000 under $200,000
  $200,000 or more
Number of Single Returns
Number of Joint Returns
Number of Head of Household Returns
Total Income
Salaries and Wages in AGI
Taxable Interest
State and Local Income Tax Refunds
Business or Professional Net Income
Unemployment Compensation
Student Loan Interest
Total Standard Deduction
Total Itemized Deduction
State and Local Taxes
Total Taxes Paid
Income Before Tax Credits
Earned Income Credit
Additional Child Tax Credit

Le Grind Continuing Case: Integrate Critical Thinking and the Data Analysis Process
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and more 
details about the continuing case.
Students can work through the data analysis process for Le Grind Coffee Distributors throughout 
the course. The case is designed so students can perform each step in the data analysis process to help Le 
Grind analyze gross profit. Besides the continuing gross profit analysis, each chapter provides additional 
questions to encourage deeper exploration of Le Grind’s operations.
Le Grind Continuing Case: Integrate Critical Thinking and the Data Analysis Process
1-41

