Artificial Intelligence  11
•	 Investment – Investment analysts and investment bankers 
can use AI to analyze available investment information of 
companies and identify companies that need to raise equity 
or debt. AI can also be used to identify companies that are 
possible candidates for a merger or acquisition. The insight 
gained from such AI systems can assist investors in knowing 
which companies to invest in.
•	 Financial statement analysis – AI analytics can be used 
to quickly analyze the financial statements of companies to 
determine the level of a company’s cash flow, profitability, 
and efficiency.
•	 Trading and sentiment analysis – AI can be used to develop 
an algorithm that tells a trader when to buy, hold, or sell 
financial assets like stocks, bonds, and cryptocurrencies. AI 
can also be designed to generate signals through sentiment 
analysis by analyzing people’s online comments and feelings 
about specific financial assets and using that information to 
determine whether to sell, buy, or hold the assets that are 
being talked about on the Internet.
•	 Fintech and digital lending – Fintech companies can use 
AI models to generate unique credit scores and forecast the 
creditworthiness of online borrowers based on the gener-
ated credit scores.
•	 Asset management – AI algorithms can be used to analyze 
investment data and the insight generated from it can be used 
to manage assets remotely. This will enable the rise of passive 
fund managers and the decline of active fund managers.
•	 Hedge fund – AI tools can be used to usher in the era of 
quantitative investing rather than the usual traditional fun-
damentals-driven long or short strategies. Hedge fund man-
agers can use sophisticated AI tools to analyze large amounts 
of data to generate short-term winner-takes-all strategies to 
beat the market within a short time.
•	 Financial forecasting – AI can be used in conducting 
high-powered predictive analysis of financial variables. AI 
algorithms can also be used to predict financial changes in 
local, regional, and global markets. Companies can use such 
insights to make better decisions within the company based 
on the insights generated from AI forecasting and to reduce 
the company’s exposure to certain markets.

12  Generative Artificial Intelligence in Finance
•	 Preserving financial stability – Financial institutions regu-
larly submit regulatory compliance returns to the regulatory 
authorities. The authorities can use AI analytics to scrutinize 
the data in the regulatory returns to detect early any sharp 
drop in bank deposits, a sudden and significant decrease in 
banking sector liquidity, and excessive debt in the financial 
system. This insight will enable the authorities to take quick 
action to prevent a bank run or a liquidity crisis in the finan-
cial system as well as to prevent a financial crisis.
•	 Pensions – AI can be used to engage and communicate 
more actively with pensioners using various channels such 
as chatbots, robot advisors, and voice assistants. AI can 
also help pension funds automate pension data collection, 
reporting, compliance, and auditing processes in order to 
reduce costs, human errors, and the risks of fraud.
•	 Insurance – AI can assist insurance companies in analyz-
ing risk, detecting fraud, and reducing human error in the 
insurance application process. It can enable the automation 
of claims payout requests and assist in insurance underwrit-
ing and risk monitoring.
1.5	 Artificial Intelligence Applications in Economics
The major application of AI in the economics discipline is to analyze micro 
and macro-economic data and use the insights gained to make meaningful 
economic decisions. Depending on the field of economics, AI tools can be 
used to make forecasts and price and output optimization decisions. AI 
tools will be more useful in specific economics disciplines and less useful 
in other disciplines. Below are some applications of AI in the economics 
discipline.
•	 AI can enable price discovery in markets – AI can make 
it easy to discover the actual price or average price of goods 
and services in markets where sellers sell at different prices 
and in markets where there are many transactions in a par-
ticular good or service. AI systems can also be used to deter-
mine the exact time of sudden changes in the price of goods 
and services. Policymakers can use such insights to inter-
vene in markets.

Artificial Intelligence  13
•	 AI in behavioral economics – Behavioral economists can 
use AI tools to analyze large amounts of data obtained from 
individuals and markets to understand how individuals 
and markets make decisions. AI can also assist behavioral 
economists in conducting sentiment analysis to understand 
the sentiment or feelings of individuals and investors about 
products, markets, industries, or the economy.
•	 AI in labor economics – Labor economists and policymak-
ers can use AI tools to collect data from employers’ recruit-
ment platforms and from job search websites and agencies. 
The collected data can be analyzed using AI analytics to 
determine whether there is a tight labor supply market and 
to make early interventions to improve labor supply before 
official labor statistics are published. Recruiters can also use 
AI-based systems to reduce the lengthy process involved in 
recruiting. This will save time, reduce the cost of recruiting, 
and motivate employers to recruit more employees, thereby 
reducing unemployment to some extent.
•	 AI in monetary economics – Monetary economists in the 
central bank can use AI analytics to forecast the appropriate 
level of money supply that is needed to support economic 
growth. Central bank economists can also use AI data ana-
lytics to determine the sectors in the economy where there 
is too much money supply. Central banks can also use AI 
analytics to tackle inflation. They can use AI tools to collect 
data from online consumer market forums to identify the 
goods and services that consumers feel are unjustly inflated. 
This insight can assist central banks in understanding the 
drivers of inflation in consumer markets. It can also assist 
central banks in knowing the appropriate monetary policy 
tools to deploy to tackle inflation.
•	 AI in development economics – AI can assist development 
economists in combating poverty by analyzing demographic 
data and identifying the people who need more resources for 
healthcare, welfare, and education to eradicate poverty. AI 
data analytics can also be used to assist development econo-
mists in identifying the most vulnerable people in the pop-
ulation who need prolonged welfare intervention to enable 
them to live a good life.
