5 MARKET SEGMENTATION USING
CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS
5.1 Segmenting Customers
5.1.1  Basis of Segmentation
5.2 Targeting Potential Customers
5.3 Positioning the Product in Customers’  Minds
5.4 Data-Driven Segmentation
5.4.1  Behavioral Segmentation
5.4.2  Dynamic Segmentation
5.4.3  Microsegments
5.5 Clustering Algorithms for Segmentation
5.5.1  The Relationship Between Distance and Similarity
5.5.2  The k-Means Algorithm
5.5.3  The k-Medoid Algorithm
5.5.4  Using k-Means to Segment Customers
5.6 Implementation Using R: Segmentation Using k-Means and k-Medoid
5.7 Understanding the Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the STPs of marketing
2. Decide how to segment customers
3. Learn the dif ferent bases of segmentation
4. Cluster to segment customers with k-means and k-medoid
5. Use k-means for finding customer segments to target
6. Interpret the output of clustering analysis
5.1 SEGMENTING CUSTOMERS
Vegan-Always is a new restaurant opening in Phoenix. It wants to send out
coupons to customers who enjoy vegan food. Should it send these coupons to all
residents of Phoenix? While this can be done, not only would such extensive
coupon distribution become very expensive, but not everyone would be interested
in the restaurant’ s offerings. Since not all customers are alike or share the same
tastes, sending the same marketing message to everyone is not ef ficient or
profitable. The best strategy for V egan-Always is to divide the entire population of
Phoenix in such a way that it can send the coupons only to those who are likely to
visit the restaurant. One way the restaurant can do this is by using
psychographics or lifestyle factors. People who are more environmentally
conscious have turned to veganism and might be more interested in such a
restaurant.
Similarly , demographics can be another way to find groups of customers who
would be relevant for the restaurant. Such a process of dividing the market into
groups of customers with similar characteristics and selecting the most
appropriate group(s) for the business to target is called market segmentation.
One way to think of segmentation is as a comprise between mass marketing
(which assumes that all customers are the same) and individual-level
customization (which assumes that all customers are unique). Instead of targeting
each customer , segmentation allows a business to target groups of customers
who are similar in the way they respond to the product. In today’ s data-driven
markets, it is now possible to segment at a deeper level; hence, microsegmenting
is becoming popular . For example, based on past buying behavior and similarity
to other customers, Amazon has the ability to create microsegments and
recommend very specific products to each of its customers.
The first step in market segmentation is to know why customers are buying a
product. What benefits is the product of fering that a customer may be interested
in? The business needs to identify all customer needs that a product or service
can fulfill. For instance, an automobile can be purchased to satisfy transportation
needs or status needs. Knowing exactly which need is being satisfied for which
group of customers can help in more accurate messaging and targeting.
Identifying product-related needs can run the gamut from using traditional
methods such as focus groups and surveys to the recent natural language
processing (NLP) methods that can be used to mine customer opinions and
reviews. Customer needs may not be restricted to just product features but may
also include the company reputation. In the 1990s, Nike lost sales because of
news that it was using child labor in its manufacturing units. The company had to
change its working conditions because customers also wanted Nike to use the
right practices. Once customers’  needs are identified, customers can be
categorized into groups with similar needs that form the dif ferent segments  for
that business. Developing a market with an imaginary buyer whose
characteristics are inaccurate is a recipe for failure. Many products have failed not
because they were bad but because they were marketed to the wrong set of
customers.
After businesses have grouped customers with similar characteristics in terms of
how they respond to product benefits, they can then decide which of these
customer groups are most profitable to target. The process of determining which
of the segments of fer good market opportunities is called targeting . Finally , when
businesses have segmented customers and decided which of these segments to
target, they need to determine how they want to position their products in the
minds of their customers. Positioning  can be described as instilling a meaning in
customers’  minds that is unique to that product. W e will first understand
segmentation in detail before moving on to targeting and positioning.
Segmentation, targeting, and positioning are generally known as the STPs of
marketing  since these three steps tend to be conducted together .
An initial step in segmentation is to group customers by similarities in their
characteristics. Customers may seek similar benefits from a product because they
live in the same region. For instance, customers who share geographic similarity
may face the same weather conditions; people living in colder climes may need
heavier jackets that can provide warmth compared to those living in warmer
places where such jackets may not be necessary .
We next discuss the dif ferent basis on which customers could be grouped
together in terms of similar characteristics.
5.5.1 Basis of Segmentation
Geographic . Customers can be segmented based on where they live. For
instance, an insurance company might of fer dif ferent types of insurance based on
whether customers are located in regions prone to tornadoes, floods, or
earthquakes.
Demographic.  A very common way to segment customers is by demographic
features such as age, education, gender , income, and occupation. For example,
businesses may target millennials dif ferently from baby boomers. Baby boomers
account for a large share of the market currently because they control a major
portion of the disposable income in the United States, which makes them a very
attractive segment of the market. Hence, it is important that a business planning
to target baby boomers understand the features of this segment. Are they health
conscious? Are they tech savvy? W ould they be willing to buy online? Are they
philanthropic compared to other segments? Businesses also need to keep in
mind that features defining a group change with time. W omen now purchase
repair tools as often as men.
Psychological.  Customers can be segmented based on their dif ferent
psychological factors, such as motivation, personality , and perceptions.
Customers can purchase a brand to satisfy a prestige motive or for a functional
motive. Rolex and Timex both manufacture watches, but people might be buying
them for dif ferent motives. Personality can also be used to segment customers.
Companies could consider the Big 5 personality traits1 such as whether an
individual is extroverted, disinhibited, neurotic, conscientious, or open to
experience. Or a business could focus on personality traits that have been shown
to affect marketplace decisions, such as impulsivity , loyalty , frugality ,
innovativeness, variety seeking, and risk aversion. Despite psychological factors
being very informative of how customers may behave in the marketplace, it is
difficult to obtain this information. Until recently , one way has been through the
use of surveys, but this cannot be done for all customers and may be
inconvenient and expensive. Some work has demonstrated that digital footprints
of customers can be used to predict their personality . Digital footprints can be in
the form of text, messages in online forums, number of likes, size of the networks
frequented, and so on. Knowing the personality of customers allows for deeper
customization of messages and recommendations targeting these individuals.
Sociocultural.  This could include stages in the life cycle, such as whether one is
single, married, or an empty nester , or social class, such as whether one belongs
to the upper , lower , middle, or working class. It also could include cultural values,
a very personal way that individuals define their core beliefs. Since cultural
segmentation maps onto core beliefs and values, it can help the business or
brand connect with a customer at a more meaningful level. In this age of
globalization, with products marketed across the world, being able to connect to
unique cultures is a challenge and yet a big asset if it can be done successfully .
Psychographic.  The psychographic basis of segmentation includes activities,
interests, and opinions of customers. Customers who like to vacation in
Yellowstone are likely to share similar interests and require dif ferent messaging
tactics than those who prefer a Disneyland vacation. Customers with dif ferent
political opinions (e.g., conservative versus liberal) may respond to dif ferent
marketing strategies. Those who are risk averse may not be open to buying a
product that is positioned as adventurous.
Benefit Sought.  What kind of benefits are people likely to look for when buying a
product? Let’ s take the example of running shoes. They could provide more than
one benefit, such as durability , comfort, speed, and appearance. They could even
be used for some form of social signaling to inform others that one is a runner .
Multivitamins are another example of a product that could convey dif ferent
benefits for dif ferent segments of customers—such as strength, prevention of
illness, and boosting of immunity .
Usage V olume.  Customers can be segmented based on how often they buy a
product and how often they use it (i.e., whether they are heavy , medium, or light
users). It is possible that heavy users form a smaller percentage of the total users
of a product but may actually buy a substantial share of the product. Hence, they
are an important segment to focus on.
Product Attitude.  Having information about the type of attitude customers hold
about a brand can help determine how they will react to a new or modified of fering
by the brand. Some customers may have extremely favorable or extremely
unfavorable brand attitudes. For example, some PC users would not think of
using a Mac, and vice versa. Such potentially nonconvertible customer segments
may not be worth targeting.
5.2 TARGETING POTENTIAL CUSTOMERS
Segmentation reveals specific market opportunities. Once customers have been
segmented based on how they respond to product features, the business needs
to evaluate the customer segments and decide which to target. It rarely happens
that a product has mass appeal. Therefore, finding the segments that are likely to
purchase the product is important. W e can understand the process of selecting
viable segments to target through the following questions that a business needs
to ask.
Are there enough segments in the market worth targeting? Having a product
that is liked by a very small group of customers indicates that the business
may have a niche product, which may not be profitable on a broader level.
Is the segment stable, and will it remain stable for some time? It’ s not ideal if
the target segments are comprised of people who are interested in fads.
Growing and stable segments are more attractive and more likely to be
profitable in the long term.
Are the segments accessible? For instance, a large segment of customers
may be interested in the product but may be in a place where it cannot be
accessed easily .
How well does this product compare with the competition in the chosen target
segments? If the product is not the innovator or the first entrant in the market,
chances are there are one or more businesses already catering to the
segments that the business finds attractive. The business needs to find out
how their product compares to existing products. If the business already has
very strong competitors catering to a segment and the segment is also very
brand loyal, it may be very hard to break into such a market.
5.3 POSITIONING THE PRODUCT IN
CUSTOMERS’ MINDS
Positioning is defined as an ef fort by a business to identify a unique selling
proposition that allows its product to occupy a clear , distinctive, and attractive
position in the minds of target customers relative to competing products in the
market. Successful positioning includes communicating the benefits of the
product as well as communicating a unique selling proposition.
Many examples exist of businesses and their brands occupying a unique position
in the minds of their customers. Some are so successful that the brands have
become synonymous with the product category . For instance, one says Kleenex
to mean facial tissue, FedEx to mean shipping, or Xerox to mean photocopying.
Oral-B realized that if it wanted customers to change their toothbrushes rather
than keep using worn-out ones, the company needed to communicate this to the
customer . The company introduced a patented dye on the brush head that fades
with usage and indicates that it is time to get a new toothbrush. Lay’ s tries to
position itself on taste through its slogan of Betcha can’t eat just one , and
Volkswagen positions itself by focusing on driving pleasure with its tagline Drivers
wanted .
A brand can position itself based on a specific product attribute, or it can position
itself in comparison to a competitor ’s offering. Some automobile brands position
their vehicles using product attributes; for example, Honda and Toyota focus on
durability , reliability , and functional benefits while V olvo focuses on safety and
Volkswagen focuses on drivability . Other automobile brands position themselves
versus other brands, such as Hyundai against Toyota, to show that they of fer the
same or greater benefits.
We next discuss how segmentation has changed in a data-rich marketplace.
5.4 DATA-DRIVEN SEGMENTATION
As mentioned earlier , the higher volume of data available to businesses makes
the following types of segmentation feasible: segmentation based on behavioral
data, dynamic segmentation, and microsegmentation.
5.4.1 Behavioral Segmentation
In the world of Big Data, an abundance of information, including click-through and
search data, is available about people’ s behavior: which products they are buying,
where they are buying these products, how much they are paying, whether a
product is more likely to sell in specific packaging, and so on. Behavioral data can
be used to extrapolate demographic and psychographic information. Many times
it is dif ficult to find out the specific personality traits of consumers that result in
their purchasing a brand (e.g., is a customer more or less frugal?). However ,
behavioral data, even from social media, can be used to predict the general
personality of customers. Moreover , with the proliferation of online retailers, it has
become easy to conduct ongoing studies to figure out customer preferences.
