10 FORECASTING THE FINANCIAL HEALTH OF A
BUSINESS USING PENALIZED REGRESSION
10.1 Financial Health of a Business
10.2 Importance of Forecasting Financial Health of the Business
10.2.1  The Influence of Borrowing on Financial Health
10.2.2  Debt Ratio and Borrowing Ability
10.3 Importance of Knowing Financial Health for Lenders
10.3.1  Poor Financial Health: Bankruptcy
10.4 Importance of Knowing a Business’ s Financial Health for Investors
10.5 Forecasting Financial Health
10.5.1  Financial Ratios
10.6 Multicollinearity
10.6.1  Testing for Multicollinearity
10.7 Using Penalized Regression for Evaluating Financial Health
10.7.1  Predicting Financial Health Using LASSO
10.7.2  Business Insights and Other Applications
10.8 Implementation Using R: Evaluating the Health of a Business
10.9 Appendix: Glossary of Financial Terms
10.10  Understanding the Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Gauge the financial health of a business
2. Understand the importance of bankruptcy forecasting for investors, lenders, and businesses
3. Use penalized regression for forecasting financial health
4. Determine multicollinearity and feature selection with LASSO
10.1 FINANCIAL HEALTH OF A BUSINESS
In any firm, the finance department serves the important functions of control, planning, decision-making,
and ensuring regulatory compliance. The department provides a backward look at how the business
performed by examining many financial reports, including balance sheets, income statements, and cash
flow statements that indicate to the business where its strengths and weaknesses lie. It also provides an
important forward look in the form of many forecasts, including cash flow forecasts, scenario planning,
and sensitivity analysis. Forecasting (or prediction) models are very commonly used in finance to inform
lenders, the business itself, and several dif ferent types of investors where they need to invest their
resources in the coming time periods. These forecasts also consider credit ratings, market conditions,
and the broader economic outlook. Where should a business invest? Should it increase prices or of fer
promotions? Can it provide employee raises, or is it time to cut costs? Can it invest in a new location or
a new product? Financial management provides an overall look at the financial health of a firm, helping
in strategic decision-making across various departments. Therefore, financial forecasting helps provide
business leadership with an overall picture to develop strategies that avoid decision-making silos. Such
forecasting also helps lenders determine whether to of fer a loan and helps business borrowers
determine how much they should borrow .
10.2 IMPORTANCE OF FORECASTING FINANCIAL HEALTH OF
THE BUSINESS
Different entities in the firm need to determine the financial health of the business since it is a critical
input in their decisions. Owners and management need to know how the business is performing its main
functions to determine which areas need further investment versus which areas might need to be
divested. Incorrect forecasts or erroneously ambitious ventures can result in resources running out and
ventures having to be terminated midstream at great financial, organizational, and human cost. General
Electric started more than 100 years ago as an electric and electronic product manufacturing company
but was able to grow into many dif ferent areas—including GE Capital, a financial services branch.
However , after the financial crisis of 2008, regulatory pressures, and the unprofitable acquisition of
French transportation company Alstom’ s power business in 2015, GE had to divest its financial division
after management determined that further investment in this division would be problematic for GE’ s
other divisions.
Employees also need to be aware of their organization’ s financial health for a variety of reasons.
Knowledge of the company’ s financial standing helps in assessing job security and in making informed
career planning decisions. Awareness of organizational finances also fosters motivation and can align
individual objectives with the organization’ s goals. Transparent communication about financial health
also nurtures an environment of trust, facilitating better understanding of management decisions,
including those concerning incentives, compensation, and organizational changes.
10.2.1 The Influence of Borrowing on Financial Health
Determining financial health is important for a business so that it can understand whether it needs to
borrow money , how much to borrow , and at what interest rate; it also needs to identify which areas are
growth areas that merit further investment. Many businesses cannot operate without borrowing.
Borrowing helps grow the business, but it also adds costs in terms of interest payments. The interest
payable on debt provides a tax shield on the taxable amount. For instance, if the tax rate is 30% and the
interest expense is $1,000, then a business receives a tax shield of $300 (interest expense × tax rate).
In fact, trade-off theory  in finance suggests that there is a trade-of f between the tax shield provided by
debt and the financial distress of not being able to repay the debt. If we avoid the extremes, trade-of f
theory will predict that risky businesses focused on intangible assets, such as technology startups, will
have less debt compared to businesses that own tangible assets such as hotels. Companies want to
maintain an optimal debt ratio to ensure that lenders and investors don’t lose faith in them. Therefore,
one way to assess the value of a business is to consider its market value as dependent on its equity and
debt.
Market value = Equity + tax shield from debt – cost of financial distress
The trade-of f theory can be illustrated as shown in Figure 10.1 .
Description
Figure 10.1  Tax Shield Provided by Debt V ersus the Financial Distress
10.2.2 Debt Ratio and Borrowing Ability
As can be seen from Figure 10.1 , a business that operates just on equity and is not dependent on debt
is not influenced either by the tax shield or by the chance of financial distress because of debt. It can
face distress for other reasons but not because of its inability to pay back debt. Let’ s look at the curve
and the straight line. The curve shows a leveraged business—that is, one that has taken a loan and
owes a debt to its lenders. W e can see that initially , when the debt amount is low , the business gets a
tax shield for the debt. Given the low debt, the business may not be facing a huge amount of debt
servicing (i.e., paying back the principal and interest for each period of the loan). Please refer to Section
10.9: Glossary of Financial Terms for definitions. If the business goes to the market to borrow , the
lenders will use the debt ratio of the business to evaluate its financial health. A low debt ratio can help
the business borrow at a lower rate of interest. This reduced interest can help it grow and do well, which
in turn can increase its market value. The business can also borrow more. The more its debt increases,
the more its tax shield will grow initially . Everything is fine as long as the tax shield is able to of fset the
probability of financial distress because of the firm’ s debt servicing costs. However , the probability of
financial distress becomes quite high when the debt servicing crosses a threshold where the tax shield
is not able to match the level of borrowing. Borrowing beyond this point results in greater likelihood not
only of financial distress but also of bankruptcy .
Consider Sears, which declared bankruptcy after being in business for 125 years and having at one time
enjoyed the title of the largest retailer in the United States. Over the years, Sears accumulated
significant debt, which, coupled with operational inef ficiencies and strategic missteps, led to financial
distress. While debt can sometimes of fer leverage and tax shields, in Sears’ s case, it became a burden,
reducing its financial health. Sears tried to raise cash by closing hundreds of its stores as a cost-cutting
measure. This laid of f thousands of workers and caused distress to its employees. The inability to keep
up with the technological changes resulted in Sears slowly falling behind. Several post hoc theories
have been suggested for its demise, including lack of investment to modernize of fline stores and not
investing in a strong online presence. The demise of this previously formidable retailer shows that
knowing the financial health of a business and strategically basing its borrowing on its ability to pay of f
the debt in a timely manner is important for all company stakeholders.
10.3 IMPORTANCE OF KNOWING FINANCIAL HEALTH FOR
LENDERS
Lenders can be banks or any financial institution that lends money to businesses for dif ferent activities.
Lenders need to evaluate the financial health of a business before they determine whether to lend to a
business, ensuring that the business will remain solvent and pay of f its debt. Lenders need to
continuously evaluate the creditworthiness of the borrower over the period of the loan. Usually , a lender
evaluates the total assets of a business against its total liabilities, as stated in the balance sheet, to
determine its financial health. As we discuss in detail later , several financial and operating ratios are
used for this purpose. Businesses with good financial health are considered more creditworthy and are
likely to qualify for a loan, while businesses with poor financial health may be denied a loan or may
obtain it only at a significantly higher interest rate. A good credit rating—for example, a triple-A  rating—
allows a business to borrow from lenders at a lower rate. Conversely , a higher interest rate indicates that
the lender does not consider the business to be particularly creditworthy and is charging the higher rate
as insurance against the possibility that the business will default on its loan payment. In extreme cases,
as we discuss in Section 10.4.1 on private equity , a business in financial distress can borrow only at
very high interest rates.
It is not surprising that lenders take these precautions because businesses can start experiencing
financial dif ficulties through factors unfolding in their macroenvironment (e.g., the financial crisis of 2008)
or because of their own past decisions (e.g., GE deciding to buy Alstom or Toys “R” Us having
accumulated significant debt while facing increased competition from online retailers and changing
consumer preferences). When a business continues to experience financial dif ficulties, bankruptcy
looms as a possibility .
10.3.1 Poor Financial Health: Bankruptcy
If the business continues to experience financial dif ficulties, such as those we can see in Figure 10.1 , it
will start to default on its loan payments, resulting in increased financial distress. Such distress is a
cause of concern for lenders, who have to decide whether additional investment is warranted in an
attempt to reverse the distress or to allow further defaults by the business. In such cases, businesses
can declare bankruptcy . Bankruptcy is the legal acknowledgment by the business that it is unable to pay
off its debts. Businesses file for either Chapter 7  or Chapter 11 . In a Chapter 11  filing, a business can be
restructured in such a way that it gets another chance. If it subsequently does well, it can pay of f its
debts and work its way out of bankruptcy . For instance, Toys “R” Us filed for Chapter 11  in 2017, hoping
that it would be able to restructure the company and pay of f its debts. However , it was not able to do so
and had to file for Chapter 7  in 2018. Chapter 7  filing does not allow the business to continue to operate;
in such cases the business will cease to exist. One form of Chapter 7  bankruptcy occurs when all assets
of the business are liquidated so that some of its debts can be paid of f. In situations where the business
owners cannot pay back their debts, then the lenders step in and take over whatever is left of the
business.
There are numerous examples of companies that were successful at one time later experiencing
financial distress. For example, David’ s Bridal, a large wedding dress retailer with a presence in several
states, found that changing tastes and focus on nontraditional dresses by millennials resulted in lowered
profits and an inability to pay their debt. Mattress Firm filed for Chapter 11 , shutting down approximately
900 stores in 2018. It struggled with adapting to changes introduced in mattress manufacture and
competition from startups such as Tuft & Needle, Casper , and Purple. Online mattress purchases have
seen a huge spike, even though mattresses were touted as a product that consumers need to physically
feel and experience prior to purchase. This resulted in Mattress Firm needing to reconsider how it of fers
its product to consumers who no longer feel the need to try out a mattress before purchasing it.
All lenders do not face the same decision of whether to let a business file for bankruptcy . It depends on
the type of business. For example, consider lenders to two businesses: a restaurant versus a biotech
startup. Initially , both need the same level of investment from the lenders. If a few years later both
companies file for bankruptcy , the situation from the point of view of the lender will dif fer. In the case of
the restaurant, the entire setup is still functional, and an easy option for the lender is to get someone
else to run the restaurant. However , in the case of the biotech startup, the space or the setting is
unimportant; the investment is in human capital and what it can produce—the ideas and innovations that
are generated by the employees. If the biotech does not do well, then what can the lender salvage?
Unfortunately , not much.
10.4 IMPORTANCE OF KNOWING A BUSINESS’S FINANCIAL
HEALTH FOR INVESTORS
A business can have dif ferent types of investors. For instance, it might have venture capitalists investing
in it during the initial stage of development. In later stages, several financial institutions, including private
equity firms, may invest or buy stakes in the business. This allows them to have a say in the working of
the business—for example, which divisions to identify for growth versus divestment. Finally , if the
company is traded on the stock market, individual investors also are interested in knowing the financial
health of a business to determine whether and how much to invest in it. Depending on the level of
investment—for example, a financial institution investing millions versus an individual investor
purchasing one share of stock for a few dollars—investors can utilize dif ferent means to understand
whether and how much to invest. Again, the financial health of a business, assessed by using dif ferent
types of financial ratios, becomes the means to determine the level of investment. In certain
circumstances, when investors might assess that a business has potential but is not performing
