control information led to the centralization of cyberspace.19 Hence,
following the centralization of cyberspace, there is a tendency toward
digitized decentralization of finance and money, which in the end will be
centralized via new technologies and controlled by a few corporations and
governments as well. To that extent, the arrival of Bitcoin and the
“decentralized finance” or DeFi establish a type of decentralization
allowing the exchange of value without the risk of requiring to face up to a
single intermediary. Despite that the Bitcoin system started as decentralized,
it seems that the Bitcoin system has been displaying escalating signs of
control and centralization.
A certain picture of centralization is money. Money, of the fiat kind, like
bank notes and coins, is issued by the central bank of a country in a
centralized manner and backed by and supported by that central bank and
its centralized government. Moreover, in a centralized system, a single
decision-maker or central authority is realized. To that extent, cyberspace
has been centralized at the commercial and organizational level and so,
digital platforms utilizing AI systems have become near monopolies in their
given area of functionality and there has been a concentration of ownership
in the organizers of connectivity rather than providers of specific
functionality. In addition, hardware ownership and management are
centralized by cloud providers along with the utility software embracing
operating systems and databases.
Are governance and decision-making crucial elements in appraising
whether a system is centralized or decentralized? A system with fully
decentralized decision-making implies the absence of any form of
influence, power, or control over developers or contributors. Taking into
consideration that decentralization runs on and within a spectrum, a system
is decentralized for the reason that there is no central decision-maker or
authority; however, a decentralized system can be more or less
decentralized than another system based on the fact that various variables
and factors appear internally and externally within and around a system,

influencing the interaction with any other system on social, political,
technological, and legal matters.
It has to be taken into account that the emergence of cryptocurrencies
and the decentralized finance or DeFi are responses to centralization.
Decentralized finance comprises widespread networks of open source, but
not all systems are decentralized across all dimensions. However, they have
altered the understanding of how digital systems operate, introducing new
methods of authentication that are more automated than those of central
governmental authorities, big banks, giant payment service providers, or
social media corporations. Digital networks require no enrollment at all,
and the databases that they utilize do not sit on that corporation’s servers.
There is a fast-changing and technologically driven world due to the fact
that everything is digitized and is becoming smart through the use of data,
which denotes more and more digital representations of things, like land
titles, currency, commodities, and contracts that are recorded, exchanged,
and stored digitally. Cloud computing is a centralized phenomenon, and
thus, the Cloud is an example of centralization in action. It is characteristic
that decentralized finance has not yet reached its full potential as a result of
several challenges linked to fraud, volatility, usability, and regulatory
uncertainty. Therefore, an AAI system controlling and correcting directly
any deficiencies in the whole process will solve the ineffectiveness of
present decentralized finance models.
It is argued that the capacity to transfer money across borders in a safe
and secure manner is a prerequisite for the global economy. The prospective
advantages of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs) in progressing
financial stability, establishing financial inclusion, and boosting the
competence and resilience of payments have been achieved owing to the
declining use of physical cash, and so, CBDCs are turning out to be a
geopolitically strategic priority and even confronting the supremacy of the
US dollar.20 Financial inclusion is the competence of people and
corporations to have effective access to a wide range of appropriate
financial services. Financial inclusion and access to credit are factors in
accomplishing financial sustainability.
It is stipulated that central banks must reexamine their role as money
issuers21 in the digital age. Thus, central bank digital cash is a way of

upholding financial stability and limiting the mass-privatization of money,
which will generate problems of trust and the quantity of money circulating
in the markets which means inevitably problems of inflation and real
growth.
The responsibility to manage and preserve the value of currency is not
the same as the responsibility to manage and administer transactions, and
the responsibility to supervise payment systems is not the same as the
responsibility to run them. Hence, the management of a transactional
infrastructure supporting CBDC is not antagonistic to the operational
responsibility of a central bank in using CBDCs to produce money and
carry out monetary policy. The European Central Bank sees that CBDC
could be an alternative to euro banknotes and could complement cash by
serving as “an electronic means of payment that anyone could use in the
euro area.”22 IMF regards CBDC as a new kind of money serving as legal
tender. Having a more decentralized governance and running distributed
ledger technologies (DLTs) allow participants to better compete and
innovate and possibly offer better and more added value to end-users and
customers. To that extent, Eddie Yue23 highlights the “need a holistic digital
money framework that will facilitate the healthy co-existence of public and
private money to support our future digital economy.”
As the concept of centralization compares to the concentration of power
and control, decentralized finance or DeFi is a new mode of operating
financial services with the concept of decentralization at its heart. To that
extent, the impetus for DeFi is to remove centralized middlemen, such as
banks, brokers, or exchanges and in doing so DeFi is using blockchain
technology to facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) transfers, borrowing and lending,
along with trading of digital assets.
To that extent, financial technologies have transformed the banking
sector, and there is an escalating competition between banks and emerging
fintech corporations due to the fact that fintech has reformed banking
operations and services. In line with this, innovations offer a platform for
banks to distribute their existing services faster and more competently
because by using AI, banks offer chatbots and virtual assistants, establishing
a direct connection with clients and thus allowing the delivery of multiple
services such as investing in cryptocurrencies or online banking without the

requirement for human intervention. Likewise, fintech technologies allow
non-bank corporations to deliver financial services conventionally offered
only by banks, and so, new competitors will substitute traditional banks
altogether.24 It is characteristic that fintech’s effect is in payments, clearing,
and settlement services, and so, fintech assumes some of the functions that
have conventionally been filled by financial institutions.25
Moreover, DeFi generates and functions as decentralized financial
service offerings and applications on open-source software platforms26 and
so, DeFi protocols wrap a wide selection of financial services, ranging from
lending and asset management activities to decentralized exchange
functionality, and processing derivatives and other financial transactions. In
fact, platform lending has changed the way people engage in lending and
borrowing around the globe. Additionally, online platform lending enhances
the efficiency of financial intermediation, which is not always conceived of
as one of the central functions of banks. Chris Clarke27 argues that
”While platforms are likely to be involved in a degree of
integration with the “installed base” of existing capitalist
sociotechnical devices and social relations, there is also
always the possibility of reimagining their design outside the
narrow financialised outlook promoted by financial inclusion
initiatives.”
Also, DeFi works as a decentralized financial system, entirely without
intermediaries such as financial institutions. On the one hand, in centralized
finance (CeFi), trust is generated by the reputation and guarantees of
intermediaries. On the other hand, in DeFi, trust is produced by the
technical properties of the underlying blockchain technology, such as
cryptographic techniques and consensus algorithms generating transparency
and immutability, not mentioning that DeFi’s absence of intermediaries
enhances working effectiveness and enables wider access to financial
services. Furthermore, DeFi initiates a stable financial system that does not
rely on centralized financial institutions or large banks.
DeFi embraces distributed ledger systems and smart contracts,
presenting an alternative to the existing financial system. Hence, blockchain

technology, in conjunction with smart contracts, offers the technical basis
for DeFi applications. In the traditional CeFi setting, the lender
stereotypically assesses the level of risk of the borrower, involving
extensive know your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML)
verification as the basis for defining the terms and conditions of the loan
agreement. In the DeFi space, the lender cannot appraise the level of risk
since the borrower is naturally anonymous; thus, the lack of risk evaluation
is characteristically made up for by overcollateralization, which means that
this overcollateralization protects against the high volatility of crypto assets.
The blockchain technology underlying the DeFi protocols guarantees
true immutability using cryptographic methods and consensus algorithms;
thus, immutability merges transparency and trustlessness because
manipulations are transparent to all, and the network rejects illegitimate
changes. DeFi gives everyone permissionless access to financial products
and services at any time. From an economic perspective, the central risks
and disadvantages of DeFi related to CeFi correlate with oracle dependency,
the design of stablecoins, high levels of leverage, regulatory uncertainty,
and possibly high barriers to entry for less well-off users participating in
lower-value transactions. Moreover, the risks associated with oracle
dependencies arise from the fact that many DeFi protocols are grounded in
information which is offered by third-party providers. Consequently, DeFi
protocols have to rely on the reliability, accuracy, and correctness of this
information, causing a security threat through malicious oracles that have
an incentive to deliver incorrect information.
It is worth mentioning here that Bitcoin is seen as a speculative
investment instead of an alternative currency or a medium of exchange even
though several MNEs accept Bitcoin payments. It is characteristic that the
problem with cryptocurrencies problem lies in their high volatility as a
result of the inability to place a correct valuation, and so, if products and
services are priced in Bitcoin, corporations will have high price-changing
costs owing to the high volatility of Bitcoin.28 To that extent, due to the
high volatility of cryptocurrencies, stablecoins have been presented to the
market and are anticipated to have stable value as they are pegged to
another asset.29 On the other hand, it is argued that the spillover effects of

Bitcoin bring volatility on stablecoins.30 In line with this, B. Thanh31 et al.
argue that
“the price movement of large-cap stablecoins can be
interpreted as signals on trading opportunities for smaller-cap
stablecoins by investors. Therefore, large-cap stablecoins tend
to drive smaller ones. The findings are expected to show how
larger stablecoin price changes influence the prices of lower
market cap stable coins because stablecoins users can easily
switch between different types of stablecoins in the
cryptocurrency market”.
As mentioned earlier, DeFi creates a new form of financial intermediation,
broadens financial inclusion, and augments operational efficiency stemming
from the qualities of transparency, immutability, and trustlessness linked
with the underlying blockchain technology, and from the character of the
DeFi ecosystem to accelerate composability among highly interoperable
protocols executing financial roles and services, such as lending,
borrowing, and exchanges. Nonetheless, DeFi risks involve scalability
issues of the underlying blockchain technology, privacy concerns owing to
the transparency property of blockchains, and legal and regulatory
reservations, such as the lack of KYC/AML checks.32
2.4 Financial Globalization
It is characteristic that globalization refers to the increasing integration of
national and international financial markets, as well as the increasing
international presence of major banks and other financial intermediaries,
and consolidation refers to the growing size and cross-sectoral scope of
financial institutions. Consolidation and concentration in the financial
services industry have been raised particularly in the origination of
syndicated loans and in derivatives markets. It could be argued that
interactions between the effects of consolidation and the problems arising
from marketization and globalization give further grounds for more

extensive use of public safety net instruments. Recently, the global financial
system has changed deeply, and technological improvements and
deregulation have increased competition in the financial services industry.
Hence, globalization has implications for the generalized injection of
liquidity in the face of financial difficulties, inducing national monetary
authorities to react to international as opposed to solely domestic objectives.
Financial globalization offers measures and inducements for corporate
insiders to better protect the rights of their minority investors.33
Supplementary, investment in corporate governance is less beneficial in
states in which the agency problem of state ruler option is noteworthy for
the reason that many actions that establish corporate insiders decrease the
risk of expropriation by the state.
It has to be taken into account that corporate insiders’ trading conduct
and investment horizon differ because of differences in investment patterns,
liquidity desires, information access, and fears concerning restrictions on
insider trading. Moreover, insiders are subject to some trading incentives
that are not applicable to other groups of investors, such as delegated asset
managers. It is characteristic that the trading conduct of insiders is affected
