Was the system accessed by the people who are authorized to do so?
Was the system accessed at odd times or near the closing period?
Was the system accessed with higher frequency at some time intervals?
Were two or more systems being accessed by a person whose
responsibilities do not allow him or her to do so due to separation of
duties?
Were systems accessed by a group of people whose hours of accessing
the system matched, however, they typically don't access systems at
the same time?
In their impressive work, Jans et al. (2013) made a strong case for using
process mining in audit and argued the value creation potential of using
process mining. They presented the following four key attributes of process
mining:
1. Process mining analyzes the entire population of data and not just a
sample.
2. Critically that data consists of meta‐data – data entered independently
of the actions of auditee – and not just data entered by the auditee.
3. Process mining allows the auditor to have a more effective way of
implementing the audit risk model by providing effective ways of
conducting the required walk throughs of processes and conducting
analytic procedures.
4. Process mining allows the auditor to conduct analyses not possible
with existing audit tools, such as discovering the ways in which
business processes are actually being carried out in practice, and to
identify social relationships between individuals.
Process mining can be used to identify processes from beginning to end –
giving a comprehensive view of how a process moves through the
company's systems and laying out the audit trail. Van der Aalst et al. (2010)
outline the capabilities of process mining as being able to provide business
provenance by ensuring traceability, process discovery by identifying

frequent patterns, and being able to compare an a priori model with the
event logs and vice versa.
Data‐Centric Analysis
Data‐centric internal control analysis refers to analyzing the transactional
data to assess internal controls and to performing actual substantive
procedures and testing. This data includes that which resides in accounting
systems and that becomes the source of information used to construct the
financial statements supplied by the management. These are the general
analysis, such as budgets, reports, business intelligence, business analytics,
and other management information reporting. In human‐led control
structures, these reports are the life‐blood of decision‐making.
In an automated world, some of that decision‐making will no longer be
performed by humans. Much of this will be discussed in the next chapter.
However, for this chapter it is important to consider that a computerized
financial system is made up of transactional data, the underlying processes
and structures, and the human who enters data or makes decisions outside
of the system. These decisions could be about how to treat a transaction, or
what/how to reconcile, or how to record an entry. But while the human
decision‐making can be considered as outside the system, since it happens
in the human mind, those decisions impact what transpires in the
computerized financial system. We, the humans, are both part of the system
and exist outside of it. As we move ahead with the AI revolution, we may
need to think differently about viewing what goes on in the human mind as
external to the system and instead include those thoughts, decisions, and
cognitive frameworks as part of the system. This broadening of the system
concept happens as cognitive frameworks and decision‐making is
transferred from human mind and embedded in the financial system.
Data + Metadata
The addition of machine learning to process mining is a great innovation for
audit. When combined, both can produce continuous, automated, and
integrated audit. Six years after proposing the use of process mining, Jans,
with another author, proposed the use of machine learning with process
mining (Jans and Hosseinpour, 2019). The idea of machine learning comes
from the fact the process mining creates an extremely large number of

exceptions. These exceptions are then interpreted by humans and marked as
“of interest” and “not of interest.” The exceptions provide a huge source of
learning data, such that the machine can learn how to classify the output of
process mining data. In fact, human‐classified data provides a perfect set of
examples needed to teach machines how to identify good versus
unacceptable patterns. Using the classification algorithms, the machine can
identify patterns and generalize its learning to recognize previously
unknown anomalous patterns.
CONTROL ACTIVITIES
Unlike the control environment assessment, which focused on the passive
factors of internal controls, control activities focus on actions and activities
related to ensuring that internal controls are implemented, and that board
and management directives are followed about internal controls. The goal
of evaluation of control activities (McNally, 2013) is to ensure that the
organization
Selects and develops control activities
Selects and develops general controls over technology
Deploys policies and procedures
The goal of intelligent automation is to automate the evaluation of the
achievement of the above three goals automatically.
Selects and Develops Control Activities
The selection and development of control activities is a function of the risks
identified. Every significant risk requires controls so that the overall goal of
ensuring that risk of material misstatement for all relevant assertions is
effectively managed. In some ways, controls serve the preventative role.
Frauds and errors should be detected and corrected before they enter the
financial system.
The selection and development of controls can be viewed as establishing a
link between each significant risk and the preventative process designed to
block fraud and error entering the financial system. This preventative

process is composed of activities that are embedded in the workflows and
business processes. For example, hiring the right people, establishing
separation of duties, developing limits on transaction sizes, implementing
approvals in the workflow, and limiting access to systems are some of the
key activities undertaken.
In the context of modernization of audit, there are two ways to determine
whether management is actively selecting and developing controls and
therefore actively engaging in control activities.
The first is the direct evidence obtained in response to the known risks
evaluation. This evidence is not based upon questionnaires but is
acquired directly (as discussed in the previous section) and it shows
whether the management has done a good job in preparing the
organization to prevent material errors and fraud finding their way into
the accounting systems.
The second is to understand the management's ability and preparation
for unknown or unanticipated emergent risks that can arise rapidly and
lead to a material event. Since the auditor's focus is primarily on the
historical information, one can question the need for including this in
the assessment. The reason for that is simple. Even if we ignore the
direct benefits for assessing the potential versus known risk‐centric
evaluation, the fact that management is engaging in understanding
potential risks is on its own an indication of management being
responsible and active in preventative response.
The model implies establishing a context‐sensitive model that offers a
relationship between risks and preventative response processes. In many
cases there will be similarities between various approaches and risks. An
assertion risk may call for a specific functional separation of duties – for
instance, in accounts payable, purchasing, and receiving – regardless of the
company. In other cases, risks may require new, customized, or creative
preventative responses. Most auditing operates with existing models, what
van der Aalst et al. calls de jure models that “describe a desired or required
way of working,” in contrast to de facto models that “aim to describe reality
with potential violations of the boundaries defined in de jure models” (van
der Aalst et al., 2011, 2010). Hence, we can assume that the de jure model

results from the knowledge of what works and what doesn't work. In this
case, they come from auditor's knowledge of a certain preventative control
being an effective mitigation to a certain specific risk. This implies that an
ontology of risks and preventative measures can be created, which
essentially can be transformed into a set of rules that can be invoked or
checked against for an audit.
The machine learning – centric automation for control activities automation
refers to two applications:
1. The application that studies new risk patterns and suggests mitigation
strategies. This can be a combination of both unsupervised (clustering)
and supervised (classification) approaches. The job of this application
is to update the existing de jure models. Whether that update happens
via learning or updating existing rules, risk‐response patterns
recognition is the core capability needed to propose and develop
effective control activities in response to emerging risk patterns.
2. The application that incorporates the above learning and compares it to
de facto situations. This is done from a combination of “metadata +
data” analysis, as discussed in the previous section. Van der Aalst et al.
clarified that concept when they said, “It is possible to promote a de
facto model to a de jure one. A comparison showing that the actual
process execution is inconsistent with the standard preexisting model
may motivate an update of the de jure model” (van der Aalst et al.,
2010). What machine learning does is to explore the inconsistency
between the de jure model and the de facto model and then if it finds
the de facto model more effective, it updates the de jure model. The
learning can happen from at least three sources: (1) historical data
from previous audits; (2) auditor (human)‐provided knowledge base
where the auditor provides examples of an effective response; and (3)
the system is designed with a critic that can simulate the risk scenarios
and critique the strategies used to prevent and counter the risks in
terms of a goal structure. This design will generally require the use of
reinforcement learning.

Selects and Develops Controls Over Technology
Control activities related to technology were addressed by van der Aalst et
al. (2011) in which they proposed the concept of an oversight system being
created to monitor another system. They clarified that a control is “an
automated task in the information system aimed at the prevention of
violations of certain business rules. These controls are strongly related to
the functions of the information system” and then cautioned that “often
business rules are generic (i.e., not bound to a specific business context).”
The process of management deploying controls over information
technology is being achieved by continuous controls monitoring (CCM).
CCM is a collection of tools that extract data from databases and scans for
separation of duties, authorizations, breaches, errors, anomalies, size limits
of transactions, etc. These controls are embedded within the technology.
Technology access controls are also important considerations. Separation of
duties can be ascertained from the reports about who logged into systems.
Ensuring that only those people who are authorized to access the systems
do so is essential for establishing a better controls environment.
The advent of AI will have three important impacts on this area. First, two
types of analysis – predictive and prescriptive – are added to the
deterministic, rule‐based anomaly detection of CCM. This means that the
system not only analyzes data from databases, it uses the data to learn about
breaches and hence predicts them and offers prescriptive remedies to
counter the threats. The second impact is that significantly larger amounts
of data can be processed and deployed in deep learning – centric
architecture. This enables detecting frauds and errors that are not easily
detectable. Third, AI's introduction will lead to control redesign and
weakening of existing controls. Intelligent systems are deployed not only by
those who are trying to protect a firm, but also by those who don't mean
well. This means that intelligent controls will be needed.
Consider the fact that our transactional (deterministic) systems have a
source of concern for us from a controls perspective – imagine the arrival of
intelligent machines in our organization. How will we manage and control
them? The advent of AI will further exacerbate the problem of controls.
This topic is covered in Chapter 18 of this book.

Deploys Policies and Procedures
The policies and procedures are scanned and using natural language
processing analyzed to determine if they comply with the risk types
identified for the client firm. For instance, frequency of key words can
classify documents into various areas of controls and determine if there was
proper coverage of each area of controls. For instance, using the Term
Frequency – Inverse Document Frequency (TF‐IDF) method, documents
can be analyzed and classified based upon importance and coverage.