329+73=0.818.
12.9 UNDERSTANDING THE CHAPTER
1. Given a dataset where instances of backorders are vastly outnumbered by regular orders,
hyperparameter tuning in Random Forest, such as the number of trees or minimum data points
per node, can be used. How might adjusting these parameters specifically aid or not aid in
improving prediction accuracy for the minority class (backorders)?
2. Consider a predictive modeling task involving a Random Forest classifier . Explain the role and
significance of employing k-fold cross-validation (CV) in the model evaluation process. How does
k-fold CV work, and in what ways does it attempt to provide a robust estimate of the model’ s
performance? Moreover , discuss the trade-of fs involved in choosing a specific k value (e.g., k = 5
vs. k = 10).
3. Decisions that are made with some information missing are called which of the following?
a. Risky decisions
b. Decisions under certainty
c. No decision can be made
d. Binary decisions
4. From the options provided, which are features of decisions made under uncertainty? (Choose all
that apply .)
a. Weighing the risks of making the decision versus the benefits of the decision
b. Weighing the risks versus the costs of making the decision
c. Weighing the benefits of the decision versus profits from the sales
d. Evaluating existing options versus new ones
5. Which of the following statements is true about the bullwhip ef fect?
a. It occurs when a small change in demand is overestimated, resulting in oversupply .
b. It occurs when a small change in supply is underestimated.
c. It occurs when demand matches supply .
d. It occurs when inflation causes demand to fall.
6. For decision trees, the metric used to find which variable is a better classifier is which of the
following?
a. Gini impurity
b. Coef ficient of determination
c. Variance inflation factor (VIF)
d. Cophenetic correlation coef ficient
7. Which of the following statements about bagging is false ?
a. Bagging is bootstrap aggregation.
b. Bagging involves sampling with replacement.
c. Bagging involves sampling without replacement.
d. Bagging helps build diverse trees.
8. Which of the following statements about downsampling is false ?
a. It addresses the issue of data imbalance.
b. It allows the model to better learn the features of the minority class.
c. It severely reduces accuracy of the model.
d. It slightly decreases specificity but improves sensitivity significantly .
9. Let’s assume that we are using a decision tree to find out which predictor variable(s) can better
classify the outcome variable: whether or not customers will buy a product. Given the following
Gini impurity values for the three predictor variables—Predictor A = 0.55, Predictor B = 0.24, and
Predictor C = 0.76—which of the following options would be considered the optimal classifier of
the buy/no buy decision?
a. Predictor A
b. Predictor B
c. Predictor C
d. Both Predictor A and Predictor C
ENDNOTES
1. Heath, Chip, and Amos Tversky , “Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice
Under Uncertainty ,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty  4, no. 1 (1991): 5–28.
2. Fischhof f, Baruch, and Alex L. Davis, “Communicating Scientific Uncertainty ,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences  111, Suppl. 4 (2014): 13664–13671.
3. IBM Corporation, “Scientific and Technical Report: Backorder Prediction,” for Defense Logistics
Agency Research and Development (Contract No. SP4701-20-C-0052), submitted February 26, 2021,
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1141471.pdf.
4. Bhan, Hyung Sup, and Eric T. Anderson, “Multiyear Impact of Backorder Delays: A Quasi-
experimental Approach,” Marketing Science  22, no. 2 (2022): 314–335.
5. The data for the analysis is a subset of data adopted from Santis et al. (2017). It was made available
as a Kaggle competition and is posted at https://github.com/rodrigosantis1/backorder_prediction.
Santis, Rodrigo B., Eduardo Pestana de Aguiar , and Leonardo Goliatt, “Predicting Material Backorders
in Inventory Management Using Machine Learning,” Fourth IEEE Latin American Conference on
Computational Intelligence, Arequipa, Peru (2017).
6. Wickham, Hadley , and Jennifer Bryan, “readxl: Read Excel Files,” R package version 1.4.3 (July 6,
2023), https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=readxl.
7. Kuhn, Max, et al., “T idymodels: A Collection of Packages for Modeling and Machine Learning Using
tidyverse Principles” (2020), https://www .tidymodels.org.
8. Wickham, Hadley , Romain François, Lionel Henry , and Kirill Müller , “dplyr: A Grammar of Data
Manipulation,” R package version 1.1.3 (September 3, 2023), https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=dplyr .
9. Wright, Marvin N., and Andreas Ziegler , “ranger: A Fast Implementation of Random Forests for High
Dimensional Data in C++ and R,” Journal of Statistical Software  77, no. 1 (2017): 1 ‒ 17,
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v077.i01.
10. Hvitfeldt, Emil, “themis: Extra Recipes Steps for Dealing With Unbalanced Data,” R package
version 1.0.0 (2022), https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=themis.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The figure consists of images from left to right as follows: image for human, house, industry and
vehicles for construction. Above human is the description CUST OMER DEMAND INCREASE; above
house is the description RET AILER OVERORDERING; above industry is the description OVER
MANUF ACTURING; above the vehicle is the description SUPPL Y. In the figure, from left to right is a
dotter wave enclosing the image and the description is present above each peak.
Back to Figure
The figure has a horizontal line on the left and above the line is a vertical line. On the left of the line are
four circular nodes of which first three are grey and the last is black in colour and this region is labeled
Low. On the right are five nodes of which first four are black and the last is grey in color and this region
is labeled High. The left image is labeled Forecasted Sales at the bottom. On the right is an image with
a horizontal line and vertical line above the horizontal line labeled Transit Time. On the left is the region
Low with five circular nodes of which first two nodes are grey and last three nodes are black. On the
right is the region for high with four nodes of which first two nodes are black and last two nodes are
grey.
Back to Figure
The figure has two images. On the top is an image for Forecasted Sales, which has a horizontal line
and a vertical dotted line on the top. The left side is a region for Low with three grey nodes on the left
and a black node on the right, and on the right is the region for high with four black nodes on the left
and a grey node on the right. At the bottom is the equation Weighted Average Impurity  = (5/9) 0.32 +
(4/9) 0.375 = 0.34. On the top left is the 1−(1/4)2−(3/4)2 = 0.375 and on the right is the equation 1–
(4/5)2−(1/5)2 = 0.32. At the bottom is an image for Transit Time, which has a horizontal line and a
vertical dotted line on the top. The left side is a region for Low with two grey nodes on the left and
three black node on the right, and on the right is the region for high with two blacks nodes on the left
and two grey node on the right. At the bottom is the equation Weighted Average Impurity  = (5/9) 0.48 +
(4/9) 0.5 = 0.48. On the top left is the equation 1−(2/5)2−(3/5)2 = 0.48 and on the right is the equation
1–(2/4)2−(2/4)2 = 0.5.
Back to Figure
The figure is a flow diagram consisting of rectangular blocks and circular nodes in the box. On top is a
block with four black nodes on the top and five grey nodes at the bottom. On the left is a block labeled
Low with a black node on the top and three grey nodes at the bottom. This block is again divided into
two blocks labeled Low on the left and High on the right, and the term Transit Time is at the center . On
the left is a block with a black node on the top and two grey nodes on the right. On the right is a block
for high with four black nodes on the top and a grey node at the bottom. This block is divided as Low
with two black nodes on the left and High on the right with two black nodes on the top and a grey node
at the bottom and at the center is the term Transit Time.
OceanofPDF .com

