aggregated by month. Then, for each toy in each month, 
the total monthly production cost should be divided by 
the total number of toys produced to calculate the average 
toy cost per month for each toy type. The result will be 
36 data points for the monthly average cost for each type 
of toy.
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 The December sales in units can be estimated by running 
a regression on each month’s unit sales. 
•	 A calculated variable must be created for each month’s 
ending inventory units for each toy type, resulting in 36 
data points for each toy. This variable’s formula is: begin-
ning inventory units + monthly toys produced − monthly 
units sold. (You can assume that this business started 
three years ago with no beginning inventory.)
•	 The December year-end ending inventory in units can be 
estimated by running a regression on the monthly ending 
inventory units for each toy type. 
•	 The December year-end average cost per toy can be esti-
mated by running a regression on the average monthly 
costs per toy. 
•	 To calculate the total December ending inventory val-
uation, the December ending inventory units for each 
toy should be multiplied by its corresponding estimated 
December average cost. Then these total costs per toy must 
be added for the total December year end inventory value. 
(Continued)

4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-25
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 There may be missing, duplicated, or erroneous data in 
the fields selected for analysis.
•	 Costs may have changed over the three years due to sea-
sonality, changes in vendors, and inflation. 
•	 Calculations may contain errors.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Perform data cleaning tests to find and correct missing 
data, duplicates, and errors that result in outlier data 
points. 
•	 Compare the unit cost and sales per month to determine 
if an inflation factor, seasonality, or other changes have 
occurred. If data shifts are noticed, their cause and perma-
nence should be verified by speaking with the employees 
who would know the answers. 
•	 Each of the calculations performed should be verified, as 
well as the averaging calculations.
•	 Regression analyses can be verified by making visual-
izations of the three years of monthly data points and 
visually inspected for agreement with the regression 
estimations.
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies 
Differ Across Practice Areas?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ❹
Summarize data and analyses strategies in professional practice areas.
As the last step of the data analysis planning stage, accounting professionals across practice 
areas design data and analysis strategies based on their project objectives. Here, we offer 
examples of common data and analytics strategies for the accounting information systems 
(AIS), auditing, financial accounting, managerial accounting, and tax accounting professional 
practice areas.
Accounting Information Systems
Because a company’s accounting information system is involved in planning, executing, 
controlling, and reporting the business’ operations, data analysis projects in this area often 
involve interdisciplinary data and knowledge. These project objectives can range in scope 
from impacting just one or two employees to involving most of the organization. All four 
types of analytics objectives (descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive) are com-
monly used.

4-26  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
ILLUSTRATION 4.20  Number of Service Requests Each Month
Number of Service Requests
Service 
Requests
Months
0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
20
40
60
80
120
140
160
180
100
99
153
118
100
46
98
98
72
92
72
153
72
92
72
77
64
AIS data analyses projects may also choose data strategies which use quantitative interval and 
ratio data:
•	Costs such as equipment and software installations and updates, and IT staff labor.
•	Budget variances for any of these costs.
It is important to select data that captures the AIS system’s performance, vulnerabilities, and 
errors. For example, to analyze performance we could analyze the number of spam emails 
(ratio data) before and after investment in a new firewall.
Accountants designing analysis strategies for AIS projects are focused on increasing com-
petitive advantage and improving the organization’s operations. They often use statistics to 
understand which element of the accounting system they should focus on. The mathemat-
ical formality of statistical tools can help to persuade management to make the necessary 
investments.
There are risks involved with AIS data choice and analysis choices. Some common 
strategic and critical risks and suggested controls for AIS data and analysis are listed in 
Illustration 4.21.
The data analyzed in these projects can include a variety of IT operational data with dif-
ferent levels of data integrity and control documentation. More traditional accounting data 
are often analyzed with qualitative categorical and ordinal data:
•	Counts of help tickets and incidents.
•	Error counts and delay times.
•	Login issues.
•	System satisfaction and IT service satisfaction.
For example, Illustration 4.20 is an example of a visualization of the number of monthly 
service requests related to the accounting information system of a company. The objective was 
to identify how many and which months experienced more than the IT staff’s capacity of 90 
service requests.

4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-27
ILLUSTRATION 4.21  Risks and Controls for AIS Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Human behavior is not captured.
• Data manipulation from unauthorized
   access or untrained employees.
• Strong logs and segregation of duties in IT.
• Eﬀective back ups and graceful degradation.
• Clear procedures.
• Thorough data cleaning and triangulation to
   verify data capture.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data and change management controls.
• Data retention and destruction policies.
• Strong access controls.
• Loss of data due to security breaches,
   ransomware, or natural disasters.
• Diﬀiculties capturing high velocity data.
• Diﬀiculties measuring interdepartmental
   dependencies on process sofware.
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Errors in variable transformations.
• Verifying analysis steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations.
• Performing sensitivity analyses for critical results.
• Data availability windows are too short to
   capture more strategic trends and issues.
• Creating eﬀective visualizations and explanations.
Auditing
Auditors’ historic resistance to change, due to high litigation risks and Public Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) review of audit processes, is disappearing as new technologies help 
them perform higher-quality, lower-risk, and more efficient audits. Audit firms are increas-
ingly investing in technology and new ways to use it. They are reorganizing to offer new ser-
vices to provide more business intelligence and economic value to their clients.
Auditors use statistics to determine risks to account balances and unusual transactions, 
especially in journal entries that involve estimates and assumptions. They commonly work 
with different kinds of data sources, from process documentation, journal entries, general 
and subsidiary ledgers, trial balances, to financial ratios. Auditors use analysis strategies for:
•	Continuous auditing modules to test large data populations rather than testing samples 
with inference risks.
•	Automated identification of dirty data, unusual transactions, and pattern anomalies to 
better reduce audit risk and fraud risks.
•	Testing entire transaction cycles’ internal controls with process mining and tracing pur-
chasing to payment flows, P-cards (purchasing credit cards) usage and payroll documen-
tation. Testing the revenue cycle from order to collection.
•	Using robotic process automation (RPA) to remove the human (and often inconsistent) 
element of repetitive audit tasks, freeing auditors to focus on areas that require thought-
ful critical thinking and judgments. (RPA applications and benefits to accountants are 
explained in the chapter that covers data and analysis developments in accounting.)
•	Testing hypotheses about inventory and fixed assets with sampling, statistical tests, and 
inferences for the population of these assets.

4-28  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.22 is an example of auditors using a process mining analysis strategy to learn 
whether all purchases followed the correct process from requisition to the recording of the 
invoice for the purchase. The visualization indicates that more than expected purchases 
(308 purchases) skip the authorized purchase requisition process step as well as the autho-
rized order confirmation, goods receipt, and vendor invoice steps. These deviations from the 
authorized process are concerning to an auditor. The blue boxes indicate where the process is 
letting in purchase orders without purchase requisitions and letting out purchase orders with-
out the subsequent required steps. An auditor will then want to follow-up on these exceptions 
to the authorized process.
ILLUSTRATION 4.22  Process Mining Results for Purchases 
Analysis
Process Start
8,864
Create Purchase Requisition Item
8,556
Create Purchase Order Item
8,864
Print and Send Purchase Order (Paper)
8,864
Receive Order Confirmation
8,556
Record Goods Receipt
8,556
3,556
3,556
Vendor creates Invoice
8,556
Record Invoice Receipt
8,556
Process End
8,864
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
8,864
3,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,864
8,556
5,308
308
5,308
308

4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-29
Regardless of the data and analysis strategies used, auditors must identify the risks and con-
trols necessary to assure they can rely on the results of their analyses (Illustration 4.23).
ILLUSTRATION 4.23  Risks and Controls for Auditing Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing data.
• Dirty data.
• Strong audit trail tests of internal controls for
   data entry, storage, processing, and reporting.
• Testing authorization and access controls.
• Fake transaction data.
• Errors in assumptions.
• Verification of all audit steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations and conclusions.
• Checks on authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
Financial Accounting
Financial accountants are primarily responsible for capturing, recording, processing, storing, 
and reporting accounting information. Accuracy, thoroughness, and documentation are essen-
tial. The accounting data they use for analyses are both guided and restrained by accounting 
regulations and government agency compliance. Due to the measurement scales of the vari-
ables they need for analysis, financial accountants may have to transform data depending on 
their objective questions. These data most often include categorical, interval, and ratio data.
The purpose of a data analysis strategy might be describing and diagnosing based on cor-
responding financial accounting rules and regulations:
•	Nature, timing, and authorization of transactions (and diagnose issues) charged to each 
account.
•	Internal control effectiveness and weaknesses.
•	The completeness and reasonableness of adjusting entries at the end of the period.
Financial accountants also use analysis strategies designed for their predictive and prescrip-
tive objectives regarding financial outcomes for managers and board members. One example 
is estimating additional information to be presented along with their financial statements, 
such as:
•	Ranking alternative capital sources and costs of capital in terms of favorability.
•	Future net income and cash flows from operations, investing, and financing activities.
•	Impacts of new strategies on the financial statement.
•	Expected future costs associated with contingent liabilities, pension costs, new business 
units or the discontinuation of business units.
Financial accountants use statistics to identify opportunities and problems with profitability, 
liquidity, and business valuation. They analyze categorical industry codes from their client’s 
categorical groups of held to maturity, trading, and available for sale investment assets to 
ensure desired diversification risks and holding strategies.

4-30  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.24 is a waterfall chart that shows the analysis results for a project with the 
objective to better understand the monthly net cash flows for an organization by month. A water-
fall chart is a useful visualization to show the positive and negative components of a change.
ILLUSTRATION 4.24  Net Cash Flow Visualization
$8,000
$7,000
$6,000
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total
Net Cash Flows
$2,600
$2,350
$(900)
$(1,400)
$(700)
$800
$2,400
$(500)
$(800)
$2,350
$1,300
$(2,900)
$4,600
Increase
Decrease
This waterfall visualization shows the change in cashflow for each month. For instance, in 
February cashflow increased by $2,350 but then decreased by $900 in March. The net of all 
the monthly changes agrees to the total. Like other accountants, financial accountants must 
identify potential risks in their data and analysis strategies (Illustration 4.25).
ILLUSTRATION 4.25  Risks and Controls for Financial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing operational and adjusting entries.
• Dirty data.
• Strong accounting cycle steps.
• Strong internal controls for data entry,
  storage, processing, and reporting.
• Fake transaction data.
• Authorization and access controls.
• Testing for and correcting missing,
  duplicate, and outlier data.
• Incorrect valuation.
• Incorrect account.
• Incorrect time period.
• Missing data.
• Calculation errors.
• Verifying all cycle steps and calculations.
• Biases and self-interests.
• Checking authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
• Incorrect calculations.
• Verify applicable GAAP guidance.
• Not following GAAP analysis guidance.
Managerial Accounting
Managerial accountants add value to their organization with different data analysis strategies. 
The purpose of most managerial accounting data analyses is to improve planning, operational 
control, and decision-making to support an organization’s mission and strategies. This type 
of data analysis is valuable for improving the selection, execution, and evaluation of organi-
zational strategy. These kinds of analyses can also lead to decisions that give employees more 
access to information, which improves performance and, eventually, organizational culture 
and operations.

4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-31
