linked to non-AI tokens around the launch of ChatGPT.125 To that extent,
Ante, L. and Demir, E.126 specify that
“crypto asset markets are highly fragmented. While there was
virtually no relevant attention for AI tokens before the launch
of ChatGPT…investors should closely follow the
developments related to specific themed tokens as their
dynamics can be different from the rest of the cryptocurrency
market.”
In line with this, Jang Ho Kim127 argues that “asset class recommendations
by ChatGPT improves portfolio efficiency compared to more diversified
portfolios…Interestingly, the three indicators chosen in our analysis are
market indicators that are also published with daily frequency (e.g.,
breakeven inflation rate measures daily expectations).”
In the EU, the Crypto‐Assets Regulation (MiCA) aims to restrict the
issuance of stablecoins to banks and so‐called e‐money institutions.
Moreover, the Regulation of Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA128)
strengthening cybersecurity, and Regulation (EU) 2022/858, which
regulates distributed ledger technology,129 accelerate digital innovation in
the interest of consumers and market efficiency. Only public authorities’ ex
ante review, coordinated by ESMA, affirms a harmonized application of
MiCA. Also, MiCA identifies its scope by referring generically to tokens

that are not yet regulated by existing EU financial legislation. To that
extent, D.A. Zetzsche et al.130 argue that “all crypto-assets could be
deemed, at first and prior to any involvement of supervisory authorities,
‘transferable securities’ unless (and until) they are exempted and requalified
by NCAs applying the classification criteria promulgated by the (Joint)
ESAs under MiCA.”
It has to be taken into account that the “cryptoization” of finance refers
to when crypto “assets are substituted for domestic currency and assets, and
circumvent exchange and capital control restrictions,” demanding global
regulation due to its digital nature.131 To that extent, Gordon Y. Liao132 et
al. argue “that payment stablecoins are proportionally less employed for
trading and leveraged speculation activities than the fiat counterparts.”
Moreover, crypto tokens have been judicially regarded as a form of
property.133
It is underlined that decentralized financial technologies could be used to
circumvent regulation via anonymization, while raising fears concerning
regulatory enforcement and increasing jurisdictional uncertainty because of
these technologies’ operations regardless of borders.134 It is worth noting
that decentralized financial services expand financial inclusion, enable open
access, and generate new openings for financiers and innovators, and so,
decentralized networks cut transaction costs and produce network effects
without encountering monopoly costs. In other words, once a decentralized
peer-to-peer network tries to dominate, it cannot accumulate enough
monopoly power to monopolize the network and prohibit others from
participating, letting everybody to gain from the network consequences and
so broadening transaction opportunities.135 Moreover, decentralized finance
generates a trust-minimized and automated version of traditional financial
infrastructure.
It has to be taken into consideration that data “propertization” empowers
data corporations to enforce monopoly power across the market by
increasing barriers for prospective market entrants.136 Monopoly power
causes discriminatory trades in data collection markets as a result of
information asymmetries and bargaining power disparities. To that extent,
Z. Chadambuka137 argues that

“Data ownership would raise what is already a high cost to
democratic politics from data. Applied to data, private
property would make a sharp switch from providing for
political liberty through ensuring decentralization of power
and head off down the path to supporting centralized political
control in the data-powered internet age. It would also move
the dial backwards, taking society out of contract and back to
status…law should provide protection against dangers from
not just data collection, but also data processing, trading, and
use”.
Digital platforms that run on blockchain technologies offering products and
services use their own digital currency to settle transactions and rely on
decentralized governance. It has to be taken into consideration that the FTX
failure was a classic liquidity crisis that turned into a solvency crisis, like
that of Lehmann Brothers in 2008, and so, the crashes of Babel Finance,
Celsius Network, BlockFi, and Genesis were more of crypto lending
corporations. Moreover, each collapse demonstrates the same pattern of
noteworthy interconnected centralized crypto intermediaries becoming
unstable as a result of mismanagement, malfeasance, fraud, theft, and a
general lack of transparency.138 To that extent, Douglas W. Arner et al.139
argue that
“while crypto was presented to the world as a new type of
finance avoiding the risks associated with traditional finance,
in practice, agency, operational and financial risks have
evolved across the ecosystem and crypto has proven not to be
immune from traditional risks of finance”.
Also, T. Yuyama et al.140 specify that
“although the stock market is correlated with the crypto
market, the correlation is negatively affected by crypto-

specific risks. Therefore, the contagion effects of a crypto
meltdown on the traditional market are not yet apparent and
limited. In fact, we find: extreme volatility in the stock market
can cause extreme volatility in cryptos, but not the other way
around. The finding is consistent with the case of FTX’s
collapse…stock-specific risks spill over to crypto-assets, and
consequently increasing the linkage between both markets,
while the crypto-specific risks have limited spillover effects at
the current stage, and are contributing toward a lower linkage
between both markets. Risk spillover is likely to be one-sided
and limited from crypto-assets up to this point. However, this
may be because traditional financial institutions have little
crypto-asset exposure”.
Thus, if transactions between the crypto-assets industry and the traditional
financial sector increase in number and size in the future, the connectedness
through crypto-assets holdings may lead to risk spillover. To that extent, the
risk in the crypto ecosystem on financial stability depends critically on how
interconnected it is with the traditional financial sector. Likewise, Azar,
Pablo D, et al.141 argue that
“financial stability risks are not extensive because the digital
asset ecosystem does not provide significant financial services
and its interconnections with the traditional financial system
are limited. At present, the potential spillovers from runs on
stablecoins that are backed by money market instruments
represent the most salient financial stability risk.”
It is characteristic that crypto assets growth has been accompanied by major
volatility, with most crypto coins going through several cycles of rapid
growth followed by spectacular collapses. Hence, crypto asset markets act
both as a source of shocks and as amplifiers of overall market volatility;
thus, they have implications for financial stability because crypto assets

incorporate technological attributes and features, serving as means of
payment by decentralizing finance,142 to store value, asset transfer, privacy,
digital identity, and governance.143 To that extent, Roshan Iyer and Adina
Popescu144 indicate that
“the interconnections between crypto assets and financial
assets are lower compared to within their respective asset
classes, in terms of both sending and receiving returns and
volatility spillovers. Furthermore, we show that crypto assets
primarily transmit spillovers to financial markets, although
during periods of financial sector stress, the reverse may also
occur.”
Some market participants see existing stablecoins as substitutes for fiat
currency in the crypto-asset ecosystem, but they are not widely used outside
crypto-asset markets.145 Data gaps and challenges avert authorities from
making more conclusive or empirical assessments of stablecoin activities. It
is characteristic that crypto asset markets risk being subject to fraud by
crypto asset sponsors.146 Moreover, asset digitization through distributed
ledger technology has transformed trading markets, and hundreds of crypto
assets are traded on various crypto exchanges, which means that the group
of tradable assets is growing.
Due to the fact that cryptocurrencies are highly volatile assets, it is
critical for investors to form a comprehensive investment strategy by
employing risk-management measures before entering this market so as to
mitigate the prospective for market crashes. Thus, investors should embrace
a comprehensive investment strategy by incorporating “trend following”
rules and respecting the impact of transaction costs. In this context, Trinh
Le and Ummul Ruthbah147 argue that
“both individual and institutional investors can benefit from
applying a momentum (risk overlay) strategy to invest in
crypto assets, as it allows them to capture the upside potential
and avoid the downside risk of these volatile instruments…

investors should carefully consider the trade-off between
transaction costs and portfolio rebalancing when
implementing trend-following strategies in crypto markets”.
It could be argued that there is a need to estimate the value of crypto assets.
It has to be taken into account that crypto lending platforms contribute to
the transformation by drawing crypto-asset deposits from retail customers
with high interest rates and using those funds to make loans. Hence, lending
platforms use customer assets to make undercollateralized loans, which
means that when lending platforms use depositors’ assets to raise leveraged
positions, and so, they escalate the fragility of the crypto ecosystem. Thus,
lending platforms provide collateralized crypto-asset loans to retail
customers and uncollateralized or partially collateralized loans to crypto-
native institutions.148 It is characteristic that Ruchi Patel149 indicates that
“crypto-colonization has relied heavily on the neoliberal
policies, populist discourse…The resulting coalition of the
crypto state and crypto elite has facilitated novel forms of
territorial, resource, and political control at local and national
scales. Despite the novelty of the crypto political economy, it
inevitably reproduces the uneven, extractive, and neocolonial
dynamics of neoliberal development in that it feeds on Global
South geographies to export value North. Bitcoin thus serves
foreign capital investment, accumulation, and imaginaries
rather than the needs and systemic challenges of the poor.
What is most worrisome is that the new crypto order operates
with little transparency, oversight, or accountability of
potentially harmful practices—from the so-called aid
programs of Bitcoin Beach to wider crypto development and
land grabbing schemes throughout the coast”.
The economic value of distributed ledger technologies (DLTs) is growing
due to their implications for the future of payment systems. The advent of

stablecoins has accelerated the development of central bank digital
currencies. Is there a shift in the usage of stablecoins? Stablecoins started
out as on-chain cash balances for crypto exchanges and traders, but they
resemble a form of general-purpose money tokenized on public
blockchains. It has to be taken into account that the business of crypto
exchanges has been shifting toward institutional customers, as asset
managers have adopted cryptocurrencies. Gordon Y. Liao150 et al. reveal
that,
“since 2021, each dollar of payment stablecoin has supported
approximately half the trading volume in cryptocurrency
assets compared to each dollar of M2 money supply
supporting traditional asset trading…the correlation between
the growth of payment stablecoins in circulation and crypto
asset returns is relatively weak, unlike the correlation found
between trading stablecoins and crypto asset returns as well as
the relationship between M2 money supply and equity market
returns”.
Hence, the rise of cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance raises central
questions regarding the nature of trust and money in the digital area.
Moreover, Raphael Auer151 et al. argue that
“the footprint of the current generation of cryptocurrencies
does not mark a sharp departure from the existing financial
ecosystem. Instead of relying on a trust-free—ie on-chain—
environment, a new set of agents has come to the fore that is
offering convenience, market access, transaction scale and
liquidity to these markets in much the same manner as in
commercial banking and securities trading, albeit without the
same degree of regulatory and supervisory oversight”.

Additionally, Mosioma and Walker152 explain that, of the 16 leading
cryptocurrency platforms, just four are subject to trading regulation. On the
other hand, cryptocurrencies and their intermediaries, involving crypto
exchanges, should be subject to the same kinds of regulation and oversight
as economically equivalent asset classes and institutions, concerning
financial stability, consumer protection, and AML/CFT standards.
Furthermore, it has to be taken into consideration that the degree of
decentralization of DeFi platforms differs within the DeFi industry, and so,
some 
intermediaries, 
known 
as 
systemically 
important 
crypto
intermediaries (SICIs), have secured large market shares or offer critical
valuation services to many DeFi Stacks. On the other hand, it is supposed
that decentralized platforms have appeared in order to avoid intermediaries
via blockchain technologies. To that extent, the malfunction of the Terra-
Luna stablecoin algorithm initiated a large-scale decline causing severe
volatility of crypto-asset prices and so, the crypto industry suffered losses.
It is characteristic that in the cryptocurrency market materialized pump-
and-dump schemes, a traditional form of securities fraud, and so, fraudsters
use social media platforms such as Telegram, Discord, and Twitter to first
spread false information and manipulate the price of low market-cap crypto
assets, and afterward they sell their holdings to make a profit, triggering a
fall in prices and investors to lose money.153 In other words, it seems that
“pump-and-dump” schemes are fraudulent practices encompassing the
artificial inflation of stock prices through deceptive statements, and so,
these schemes involve selling overvalued securities for a profit, leaving
unsuspecting buyers with valueless investments. Moreover, “pump-and-
dump” manipulation becomes profitable in the presence of technical
traders, who manipulate information asymmetry and produce returns by
raising prices and selling immediately. To that extent, stock prices increase
as a result of information asymmetry and the influence of spammers. Dean
