1.2 Bitcoin as Money
It has to be considered that there is no need to distinguish the character of
the transactions to assess a currency as a medium of exchange.8 A currency
being a safe store of value is the key element for a means of being money ,
which is questionable at the moment, for digital/virtual currencies.
Nakamoto9 was persuaded that the internet needed a currency that was, like
it, decentralized, protected by cryptography , and favorable for peer-to-peer
exchange. A group with pseudo-Libertarian political beliefs finds Bitcoin
attractive owing to its lack of connection to any government, adhering
openly to distrust of the world financial system, and the timing of Bitcoin’ s
introduction, corresponding to the very bottom of the global financial crisis
in 2008–2009.
Bitcoin10 is a non-fiat cryptographic electronic payment system that
claims to be the world’ s first cryptocurrency . It is a peer-to-peer, client-
based, entirely distributed curre ncy that is not based on centralized issuing
bodies being a “sovereign” to function. The value is produced by the users,
and the procedure is executed by utilizing an open-source client installed on
any computer running Windows , Mac, Linux,11 etc. In Spain, the judgment
of the Supreme Court12 20/06/2019 denied the recognition of Bitcoin as
legal tender (money) but considered it an “incorporeal asset.”
Bitcoin is a homogeneous, virtual good that is entirely identical across
all the online markets in which it is sold. The blockchain is a shared public
ledger on which the entire Bitcoin network relies. It must be considered that
network economics is a new field within the information society , and its
principle is that products and services are produced and value is added via
networks functioning on large or global scales. This is in contrast to
industrial-era economies, in which ownership of physical or intellectual
property originated from a single enterprise.13
On the one hand, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled that
Bitcoin was a virtual currency and that it could be accepted by the parties as
a non-c orporate means of payment.14 On the other hand, the Pays era
judgment15 highlights that
“the definition of electronic money , which is considered to be
any monetary value stored by electronic or magnetic means
which represents a claim on the issuer , is issued on receipt of
funds for the purpose of making payment transactions (…),
and which is accepted by a natural or legal person other than
the issuer of electronic money .”
To that extent, the Advocate General16 underlines that
“Bitcoin is not money as it does not fulfil the three functions
of money: it is not a medium of exchange, nor a store of value,
nor a unit of account. These assets are not backed or managed
by any central entity , nor is there any guarantee that they can
be exchanged for cash. They are slow , costly and cannot be
used to pay everyday bills. Its transactions are slow , costly ,
and cannot be used to pay everyday bills. It is not issued by
any central public authority , and it does not have the same
level of trust as an of ficial currency such as the euro, which is
backed by the central banks of the euro area.”
Hence, the Advocate General judges e-money to be Proton, miniCASH,
Moneo, Geldkar te, and PayPal, and so, for the Advocate General, money is
only stored in a network, the medium is “computerized” or virtual, and
Bitcoin is not electronic money . Thus, the Advocate General’ s view
disagrees with the opinions articulated by the CJEU in the Hedqvist
judgment, wher e it deems Bitco in to be a virtual currency , which is legal
money for the reason that it is understood to be within the autonomy of the
parties and what  they consider to have value, and is eventually the object of
exchange between them.
Bitcoin is differentiated from fiat money since it does not have the
agency costs of public money . John O. McGinnis17 argues that
“If Bitcoin is to grow into a more stable currency , it will need
financial intermediaries to do so…Thus, even for a
cryptocurrency like Bitcoin that should not itself be regulated,
there is this paradox: to succeed, these structures currently
seem to require financial intermediaries to function optimally
and those intermediaries create the very agency problems that
Bitcoin is designed to avoid.”
It is argued that Bitcoin does not entail faith in any public institution that
creates money; on the other hand, it seems to be recognized that financial
intermediaries are needed for its operation, which means going back to fiat
money .
It is worth mentioning here that in order to flourish as a currency , Bitcoin
and any other similar crypto require the same kind of financial mechanisms
used to deepen the market for other financial assets, which means enabling
price discovery and exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”). Also, while crypto
was activated as a movement to free people’ s financial business es from the
state, now the government is getting into the digital asset game with central
bank digital currency (“CBDC”).
It has to be taken into account that the Bitcoin network operates as a
public notary for all transactions conducted on the network, leaving a trace
of what has transpired in the virtual universe, in cyberspace.18 It is worth
mentioning here that cryptocurr encies are deemed to be volatile and lack
trustworthy information, making them dangerous investm ents.19 The
absence of regulatory certainty is a “massive barrier” to responsible
innovation in the crypto ecosystem.20 Furthermore, cryptocurrency is
described as digital money based on blockchain techno logy. It is
characteristic that Michael Conklin21 considers that “corporate inves tment
in cryptocurrencies and the acceptance of cryptocurrencies as payment
violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics…accepting
cryptocurrency for payment and holding cryptocurrency as an investment
clearly violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics.”
Payments and money transfers are the most obvious application of the
distributed public ledger technology . Bitcoin transaction costs are much
lower than those of traditional financial networks. The develop ment of the
“blockchain” is the innovativ e aspect of Bitcoin, which is a large
decentralized database that has distinctive identifiers for each user and each
Bitcoin. Moreover , virtual currencies and Bitcoin have the potential to
revolutionize the means by which payments are processed, but only if they
become ever-present.22 Could a broadly  used virtual currency pose a risk to
the stability of the financial system as a whole and to the economy more
generally? It could be said that a virtual currency can be transfo rmative if it
is widely adopted, and a widely adopted virtual currency can threaten the
financial system23 as long as it is uncontrollable.
It is worth mentioning that it is very difficult to get accurate and up-to-
date information about the number and volume of virtual currencies in
circulation. The majority of virtual currency schemes have insignificant
market capitaliz ations of below €1 million and only 21 exceed this figure;
only the top eight are above €10 million.24 Bitcoin25 is clearly the largest
and most well-established virtual currency , with a market capitalization of
more than $28 billion.26 On the other hand, Litecoin is scripted on an open-
source global payment network  that is never controlled centr ally by any
authority and uses a “scrypt” as proof of ledger , which can be decrypted
through a consumer -grade CPU. It could be said that Litecoin has a faster
block generation  rate compared to Bitcoin and thus presents a much faster
transaction validation. Ethereum was launched in 2015 and is a
decentralized software platform that permits Smart Contracts and
Distributed Applications to establish and run without any downtime,
control, impedim ent, fraud, control from any other third party . Zcash is a
more secure, open-source, decentralized digital cryptocurrency launched at
the end of 2016 , and it is regarded as more secure because all transactions
are recorded and registered on a blockchain with details about sending and
receiving parties, and the sum transferred remains secure by presenting a
provision for shielded transactio ns. There are also a number of post-Bitcoin
virtual currencie s that claim to be superior to Bitcoin, includin g Litecoin,
GeistGeld, SolidCoin, BBQcoin, and PPCoin,27 Dash (Darkcoin), Ripple
(XRP), and Monero (XMR). It is worth mentioning that command
regulation has a reputation for being inflexible, which means  suffocating
competition and inhibiting enterprise and growth. On the other hand,
flexibility is a problem with regulatory technology , but being  capable of
delivering more precise regulation. Even though precision is desired in
financial regulation as in any other field of law, it comes at the price of
flexibility . Computer scientists must solve this problem by developing
software that operates within flexible legal terms.
Under English law, cryptocurren cies are to be treated as property and so
the UKJT  accepted that cryptocurrencies have the characteristics of
property , including being definable, capable of being owned and
transferred, and having value.28 Hence, English courts recognizing crypto
assets as “property” means that they could be the subject of a proprietary
injunction.29 In B2C2 v Quoine,30 the court accept ed that Bitcoins could be
the subject of a trust, and so were property . Nonetheless, in New Zealand,
cryptocurrencies were regarded as “digital assets,” a form of property
capable of being held on trust.31 To that extent, A. Fowowe32 argues that
“While the US dollar has historically been the dominant
currency in international trade, alternative currencies like
cryptocurrencies and stablecoins are now more prevalent,
opening up new opportunities for individuals and
organisations to conduct cross-border transactions. However ,
using cryptocurrency also comes with legal dif ficulties, such
as the issue of jurisdiction, whether cryptocurrency can be
regarded as a property or being tangible under the Sale of
Goods Act.”
It is vital that recognizing the inner workings of monetary systems
generates valua ble insights into the function and stability of traditional
monetary systems33 and of the value of the alternatives offered by digital
networks such as Bitcoin34 and in general crypto-assets. Hence, monetary
exchange is more valuable at promoting cooperation than alternative
record-keeping systems. The important factor is not the type of money , but
rather the equality between units of money and the units of value in the
economy , which means that the value of money has to be equal  to the units
of value of the total worth of trade in an economy . If the exch ange rate is
not determined by the demand and supply of money and traded goods and
services, then instability produ ces problems in an economy . Price is the
variable reflecti ng the exchangeability of any item versus money. Money
has no role to play when individuals depend on shared knowledge of past
conduct to imitate patterns of monetary exchange.35 Bigoni et al.36 argue
that
“the dif ferences in long-run ef ficiency , strategies and
distribution of earnings in the Money and Memory treatments
demonstrate that money performs a richer set of functions than
just revealing past behaviors…the use of money imposes a
discipline on what agents are willing to do in order to keep the
economy on a cooperative track. Such findings suggest that
well-functioning monetary systems are not simply
rudimentary arrangements for monitoring past conduct in
society , but play a richer role than previously thought.”
The European economy rocketed  once it was freed from a restrained money
supply furthered  by the development of new markets, new technology , and
new payment systems that made possible long-distance commerce and
movements of capital possible. Governments produce money  themselves
much more efficiently in the age of paper currency and electronic benefit
transfers. Money is no longer tied to specie extraction.37
Finally , in the developed world, government fiscal activity is subject to
some degree of democratic accountability , and fiscal endeavor is a
manifestation of democratic politics.38 Governments are now much more
energetically involved in control over the private production of money .
Central banks now control the money supply by amending the price of
money through the setting of target interest rates. Money production has
become monetary policy , achieving the politically desired level s of growth,
employment, and inflation. Thus, market, governmental, and technological
changes signify that the effectiv eness of private money creation stemming
from fractional reserve banking is no longer so self-evident,  even if its
inherent instability is more and more obvious.
Banking law restricts entry into money augmentation.39 Morgan Ricks40
argues that
“private money often plays a central role in macroeconomic
disasters, at least those emanating from the financial sector .
The law of money encompasses the law of central banking…
the law of money must also address the interface between
public monetary institutions and private law .”
Banking regulat ion alters how capital is distributed both across sectors
within an economy and across jurisdictions, escalating competition among
governments that want to maximize national welfare.41