data are non-measured raw data that have been formatted as numeric and discrete, mean-
ing that they are non-continuous and will never have partial unit values. These fields ­cannot 
be used in analysis for mathematical calculations because they refer to unique identifiers 
for inventory items and their product category group. The InventoryDescription field’s data 
source is also a non-measured raw data field formatted as a text field, which cannot be used in 
numeric calculations during the analysis.
The sources for data fields like UnitCost and NumberOnHand are different because they 
are measured raw numeric data, which can be used in mathematical calculations.

4-14  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Finally, UnitCost and NumberOnHand can be multiplied in an expression to calculate 
a new field within a query called TotalCost. This new field source is calculated data that 
is also numeric and likely to be used in a variety of different mathematical calculations in 
accounting.
A data field’s measurement scale refers to the type of information provided by the data. 
Data measurement scales should be considered when designing the data strategy, as they 
impact which analyses can be performed on the data. Data measurement scales are grouped 
into four categories: categorical, ordinal, interval, or ratio (Illustration 4.11).
ILLUSTRATION 4.11  Measurement Scale Descriptions and Examples
Categorical (nominal) data
Ordinal data
Labeled or named data that
can be sorted into groups
according to specific
characteristics. The data do
not have a quantitative value.
Ordered or ranked categorical
data. Distance between the
categories does not need to be
known or equal.
Interval data
Ordinal data that have equal
and constant diﬀerences
between observations and an
arbitrary zero point.
Ratio data
Interval data with a natural
zero point. A natural zero
point means that it is not
arbitrary.
Regions, product type,
account numbers, account
category, locations.
A survey question inquiring
about customer service may
ask customers to rate their
experience from 1 to 10.
Temperature, time, credit
scores.
Economic data, such as
dollars or euros.
Description
Example
Measurement Scale
Classification
Professional Insight 4.2: How Do You Select Financial Data  
for Analysis?
Jadon is an accounting and finance major, student athlete, and president of the first-genera-
tion student organization on campus. During his internship, he realized how much his career 
would involve data analysis of financial statement information.
On the first day of my summer internship, I was tasked with calculating 
ten financial ratios for five companies in the same industry for the most 
recent three years. I was left to figure out how to get the data and perform the calcu-
lations on my own. I reached into my sports experience to gather my courage by creating 
a game plan. First, I had to select and set up my analysis tool.
I chose Excel with the Analysis ToolPak and made a raw data template based on the totals 
I would need for the ratios in the first worksheet. I copied it five times for each company’s 
raw data. I made another worksheet for all the ratio calculations as the rows, and the com-
panies would be the columns, grouped by each year. I organized the ratios into profitabil-
ity, liquidity, and solvency groups. I entered ratio formulas that tied back to the raw data 
worksheet cells and documented my steps on another sheet to remember my choices.
Next, I had to find out where to get the data. I went to the SEC’s xBRL 
data and downloaded the financial statement information and entered 
what I needed into Excel. An unexpected benefit of having my ratios all in one sheet 
was that it was easy to make visualizations of my results. I was amazed by how clear the 
best and worst performing companies were from these visualizations. I saved my file and 
emailed it to my boss.
We discuss how data measurement scales influence analysis strategy options later in this 
chapter. Next, let’s examine the risks and controls related to our data strategy.

4.2 What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis? 4-15
 ILLUSTRATION 4.13  Representative Sampling Risks
Entire Population
Imagine a jar with 100
marbles: 30 blue marbles
and 70 white marbles.
If a sample of ten blue marbles was
extracted, it would not be
representative of the population as
the entire population has twice as
many white marbles.
A representative sample of ten
marbles would have three blue
marbles and seven white marbles.
Nonrepresentative Sample
Representative Sample
 That is why performing tests on the sample’s representativeness can either verify its validity or 
detect its significant weakness in representing the underlying marble populations. 
 The second risk is potentially including unusual data points in an analysis. Outlier data 
points are unusual data points compared to the rest of the data in either an activity point 
(x-axis or the independent variable), such as number of units produced, or an unusual level 
of the economic value (y-axis or the dependent variable), such as total costs or total sales. The 
best control for identifying outliers is to visualize the data in a graph to check if the measure 
 Consider Data Strategy Risks and Implement 
Controls
 Another benefit of documenting data strategy in a project plan is that examining each choice 
can help identify three common data risks that might affect an analysis’s validity, accuracy, 
and reliability ( Illustration 4.12 ). 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.12  Common Data Risks and Recommended Controls 
Data
Risks
Controls
Non-representative sample selections
Outlier data points
Verify representativeness of sample.
Perform a histogram or quartile analysis to 
identify outliers, then explain or justify the rule
used for outlier adjustment or removal.
Dirty data
Verify integrity of data set and clean up
dirty data issues.
 The first risk is that a sample extracted from a larger population of data are a poor repre-
sentation of the underlying population. For example, a random selection of different colored 
marbles might not be a sample that accurately represents the characteristics of the marble 
population ( Illustration 4.13 ). 

4-16  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Apply It 4.2
Identify Data 
Characteristics
Accounting Information Systems   Tremendous Toys has recently developed a database to cap-
ture inventoriable costs from their production each week.
Data has been extracted from the following data fields: 
SOLUTION
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
ProductionRunDate
Non-measured raw data
Interval
NumberOfToysinRun
Measured raw data
Ratio
ToyIDNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
DirectMaterialsUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
DirectLaborUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
OverheadCostApplied
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalRunCost
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalUnitCost
Calculated data
Ratio
Complete the three-column table by adding each data field’s type and measurement scale. 
is very different than the rest of the data. Identified outliers can either be remeasured (if pos-
sible) or removed with a logical and documented rule.
The final data risk is that a variety of data errors, or dirty data, are problematic for data 
analysis. Dirty data include missing, invalid, duplicate, and incorrectly formatted data. For 
example, the purchase orders, invoices, or checks written by the company should be sequen-
tially accounted for, with no missing numbers or two with the same identifying number. 
­Controls should always test for dirty data before the analysis is performed. Data can be com-
pared to its source documents, or if that is not possible, tested for reasonableness. Testing for 
reasonableness can include checking for missing sequence numbers, duplicate numbers, or 
verifying the data have the expected format or acceptable characters.
Once data have been selected, evaluated, and any risks identified and controlled, the next 
step is to develop an analysis strategy appropriate for the objective of the project.
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
ProductionRunDate
NumberOfToysinRun
ToyIDNumber
DirectMaterialsUsed
DirectLaborUsed
OverheadCostApplied
TotalRunCost
TotalUnitCost

4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-17
4.3  What Should We Consider When 
Selecting an Analysis? 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Explain how an analysis strategy is designed.
Consider these two questions when designing a data analysis strategy:
	 1.	 Can the chosen analysis strategy answer the specific objective questions?  
	 2.	 Is the measurement scale of the data appropriate for the selected analysis strategy?
Earlier in this course you learned there are four types of data analysis objectives: descriptive, 
­diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive. Each asks different questions of the data. We perform 
analyses to answer those ­questions. The specific analysis that can be performed on the data 
is influenced by the data’s measurement scales. Next, we summarize what to consider when 
designing analyses for projects with descriptive and diagnostic objectives.
Designing Analyses to Describe and Diagnose
Because understanding the phenomena captured by the data is essential, many data analysis 
projects begin with descriptive analyses. Diagnostic analytics involve many of the same anal-
yses as descriptive, but the focus is on explaining why something happened. Because many 
types of analyses can be both descriptive and diagnostic, it makes sense to discuss these two 
analysis strategies together.
The specific type of descriptive and diagnostic analysis used depends on the measure-
ment scale of the data. For example, calculating the median observation in the data requires 
using either interval or ratio measures. Illustration 4.14 shows some analysis strategies for 
descriptive and diagnostic objectives (checkmarks indicate appropriate analyses, and Xs indi-
cate analyses that are inappropriate for the measurement scale).
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  Analyses Strategies for Descriptive and Diagnostic Analytics
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Central Tendency
Mode
Median
Mean
Frequency Distributions
Both counts and %s:
Group frequency
Cumulative frequency
Relative frequency
(Continued)

4-18  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Data Dispersion
Minimum, maximum, range, quartiles
Variance and standard deviation
Normality, skewness, and kurtosis tests
Visualizations
Only bar and pie chart
Many other trends options
Histograms/box plots
Correlation
Scatterplots, Pearson’s R
Cross tabulation analysis
Calculations
Totals and subtotals
Percent change
Percent of total
Regression
Descriptive Analysis Strategies
Recall that accounting data are historic economic transaction and valuation data. Accoun-
tants, business managers, and regulators all want to know more about what happened and 
whether the data signals good or concerning news, so descriptive analyses are the most com-
mon analysis strategies using accounting data. It is useful for evaluating strategy performance 
because it provides more meaning and business intelligence than from just looking, for exam-
ple, at the totals reported on one year’s financial statements.
Let’s work through an example using the using the WeMakeIt Inc. accounts receivable data 
set to illustrate the explanatory power of descriptive analysis even when using categorical data. 
Recall that the objective for this analysis was to become more confident in the percentages 
used for estimating bad debts. The initial descriptive analysis results indicated a large increase 
in the number of customers with open invoices at the 2025 year end compared to the 2024 year 
end. This analysis had been designed to answer two descriptive questions:
•	Objective question 1: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the year end 
of 2024?
•	Objective question 2: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the end of 2025?
A data strategy and an analysis strategy were developed:
•	Data strategy: Use the categorical variable of CustomerNumber to identify customers 
with outstanding balances.
•	Analysis strategy: Count and compare the frequency of unique customer numbers with 
outstanding invoices at the year-end of 2024, and then repeat the analysis for the 2025 
year-end. Note that both count and frequency are analyses that can be performed on cat-
egorical data.
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  (Continued)

4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-19
ILLUSTRATION 4.15  
Outstanding Invoices by Customer 
Number 
Number of Customers
with Outstanding Invoices
at 2024 and 2025 Year-Ends
Number of
Customers
0
10
20
30
40
60
50
2024
2025
37
37
52
The results indicated that in 2024 there were 37 unique customer numbers with outstanding 
invoices, and in 2025 there were 52 unique customers numbers with outstanding invoices. 
Next, we discuss diagnostic analysis strategies.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.5: Be Careful Interpreting 
Initial Results
You might initially conclude that accounts receivable in 2025 has the potential for higher col-
lectability risk simply because there were more customers with outstanding invoices in 2025 
than in 2024. However, this initial judgment may be affected by internal assumptions and biases 
(Risks):
•	 The 2025 increase in the number of customers with outstanding balances may not be a nega-
tive result, as the company grew and added new customers in 2025.
•	 These results may motivate you to evaluate alternative explanations and perform new analyses, 
such as determining if the 2025 customer numbers with outstanding invoices at year end had 
more invoices owed in 2025 than in 2024, or if the value of their outstanding balances were high-
er in 2025, possibly signaling a cash liquidity concern This result is more closely relevant to our 
company’s accounts receivable risks of uncollectability (Alternatives).
Diagnostic Analysis Strategies
Diagnostic analysis strategies can be compared to detective work. Accountants can use these 
analysis strategies to identify and discover the most likely causes of accounting phenomena. 
While both descriptive and diagnostic analysis strategies are descriptive techniques, diagnos-
tic analysis strategies also identify what factors have caused the lower sales revenues or the 
higher costs, for example. Diagnostic strategies always require applying critical thinking skills.
Stakeholders rely on accountants across accounting practice areas to diagnose what is 
happening and explain, typically in non-accounting terms, why it is happening. For instance, 
systems accountants often use error dispersion data to identify system performance issues or 
unusual activity data that may indicate unauthorized party access.
