by the horizon of their compensation contracts and so, many insiders build
up shareholdings through their compensation package. Also, insiders have
reasons to use their privileged access to private information to exploit
trading profits by timing their purchases and sales. To that extent, Ferhat
Akbas34 et al. argue
that “an insider’s investment horizon establishes a benchmark
for expected patterns of continued trading behavior and thus
helps identify unexpected insider trades, which should be
more informative in efficient markets…the trades of short-
horizon insiders are both more unexpected and more
informed, on average, than those of long-horizon insiders”.
The significance of efficient financial markets lies in allowing those who
want to obtain capital from different sources at reasonable rates. Financial
intermediaries activate scarce savings, evaluate research projects, manage
risk by evaluating future cash flow, and facility transactions. Moreover,

financial constraints arising from imperfections in financial markets are a
result of both information asymmetry and the politico-institutional
environment.35
Enterprises globalizing their operations and the associated capital flows
have become key players in the world economy, and cross-border conduct
and capital flows span institutional settings with shifting investor
protections and levels of capital market expansion. Does the rapid
globalization of financial markets take humanity into uncharted territory?
Global finance advances via new digital financial instruments. Is massive
international lending a new phenomenon? The gold standard allowed huge
flows of capital to search the world for the highest return, permitting rapid
growth and fostering international trade, making gold standard look like the
golden age of the international monetary system.36 Capital mobility is today
very high for short-term instruments but not for long-term capital
movements.
It has to be taken into account that international capital mobility has
prevailed in periods of political support either for subordinating monetary
policy to exchange rate stability (as in the gold standard) or for giving up
exchange rate stability so as to enable monetary policy to pursue domestic
objectives (as in the post-Bretton Woods era). Besides, when countries
attempted at the same time to target their exchange rates and use monetary
policy in pursuit of domestic objectives, they had to impose controls to
curtail capital movements. International currency, flexible exchange rates,
and sound institutions are considered benchmarks that defines conditions
under which countries can integrate effectively into the world financial
markets. In contrast, weak currency, fear of floating, and weak institutions
are experiences of developing countries as they integrate into international
financial markets. Financial market interlinkages create extensive
interdependencies in the course of which a shock in one part of the system
can be transmitted to others, exacerbating the contagion of problems from
one economic unit to another.37
The globalization of international trade, in which markets are opened to
flows of foreign goods and services, is necessary. To that extent, financial
globalization has several crucial benefits in emerging market economies by
bringing in new capital, lowering the cost of capital, and promoting

investment, which in turn encourages growth. Hence, when foreign capital
and financial institutions enter a state, they enhance the allocation of
capital. Moreover, financial globalization needs to be widespread enough so
that the entry of foreign capital and foreign institutions boosts competition
in home financial markets. In fact, AI financial globalization is not only a
choice but also a need to be the focus of the next great AI globalization.38
Credit money is the form of money mostly circulated under conditions of
financial globalization, and thus, due to instability of credit money, general
instability has emerged in financial markets globally. Can uncertainty be
regulated? The answer is no; however, ex ante rules will alleviate the
consequences because uncertainty, being the motivating factor not only in
generating profits but also in the character of financial markets, cannot be
removed by regulation from financial markets. To that extent, Chris
Clarke39 argues that “uncertainty in finance might be beyond regulation but
at the same time there is still a societal need to attempt to achieve a politics
of uncertainty that can cope with ignorance of the future through
experimental governmental efforts.” On the other hand, AAI technology run
by AAI humanoids and operating objectively within financial ecosystems
will bring fair growth by correctly utilizing global resources.
Finance is subject to problems like incomplete markets, asymmetric
information, and bubbles, requiring a necessity to prevent financial
instability by controlling financial flows which means that the introduction
of regulations within national boundaries, taking the form of preventing
financial flows that are mainly geared toward speculative activity, is
necessary. In other words, regulations must bring financial stability and
promote governments’ economic and social objectives. The productive
sectors must neither be constrained by the price of finance nor by
inadequate financial flows.
Financial globalization will develop a global institution that can play the
central coordinating role.40 Zekos considers that, in the AI era, IMF should
take on new responsibilities and contribute to the harmonious financial
development in a digital and global world. It is argued that a single currency
will allow the global financial market to develop uniform credit standard
requirements and, in the absence of the latter, this process will cause
periodic financial crises and further intensify the unequal distribution of

income and wealth, which immediately contravenes the true meaning of the
word 
globalization.41 Also, 
financial 
development 
advances 
the
effectiveness of capital allocation and lessens information and transaction
costs, which means higher rates of technological growth, capital formation,
and GDP growth.
To that extent, Zekos considers that the interplay of values among strong
currencies is a dynamic factor for the movement of capital, creating
development opportunities worldwide. Greenspan42 suggests that
“A clear benefit of financial globalization is that, to the extent
that it reduces home bias, savings will be better directed to the
most promising investments in the world, increasing global
economic growth and prosperity. However, so long as risk
aversion exists and trust is enhanced by local familiarity, we
cannot expect that home bias will fully dissipate”.
Moreover, Zekos believes that financial globalization allows for a better
environment where capital will be moved around the world with fewer
barriers, where productivity will bring higher profits. Thus, financial
globalization means growth for developing economies as global savings are
resourcefully directed to capital accumulation in developing countries
where the marginal product of capital is highest. Integration requires
individual countries to have the capability to attract financial capital, which
is independent of external barriers and is determined by the internal state of
the economies of the countries concerned and the future opportunities these
economies can offer.43 Developed and newly formed countries undertake
various measures to prevent financial instability by controlling financial
flows that are purely speculative in nature, ensuring that possible expansion
in aggregate expenditure in the productive aspect of the economy is not
constrained by inadequacies in the financial flow.
It is characteristic that financial globalization has diverse consequences
for bank risk-taking, market power, efficiency, trade, economic growth, and
business models. In fact, banks generate liquidity by transferring liquidity
liabilities to illiquid assets or by offering off-balance sheet activities such as
loan commitments or standby letters of credit. In other words, bank

liquidity making assesses total bank output and shows a strong positive
correlation between bank liquidity and real economic output, which means
that liquidity making plays an imperative part in the economy.44 Also,
currently, AI financial globalization boosts liquidity construction by
bringing additional lending resources to the banking systems of host
countries. Subsequently, financial globalization and bank liquidity have
implications for policymakers when articulating appropriate measures to
deepen financial globalization.
Has AI financial globalization yield equitable benefits for all nations? In
fact, foreign investors encounter informational barriers because of the gap
between home and host countries and so, becoming cautious in taking risks,
which means a reduction in liquidity creation. In line with this, S. M. Aamir
Ali and A. Ghose45 argue that
“Although the concept of globalisation was initially intended
to enhance the agency of developing nations, it has instead
resulted in the erosion of their autonomy to independently
determine their course of action. The democratic process has
been impacted by the loss of decision-making power
experienced by emerging countries as a consequence of
globalisation. The rules governing globalisation were
inequitably formulated to provide preferential treatment to
developed nations. Contrary to prevailing popular opinion, the
impact of globalisation on both developing and affluent
nations has exhibited disparities”.
The widespread deployment of robots and AI-enabled systems in many
fields of economies globally has generated a digitized financial capitalism
encompassing a shrinking workforce. In fact, digital capitalism is a
transformation of the capitalist system of production in which digital
technologies comprise the central production and control device in the
global market which means that capitalism becomes digital when the
production procedure of particular commodities is accomplished by and
through privately owned digital technologies. Thus, digital capitalism

encompasses the processes through which digital technology facilitates the
structural tendencies of capitalism.46 In fact, digital capitalism by
encompassing digital networks is becoming vital part of capital assets
worldwide by embracing metadata collected through cyberspace platforms,
generating the formation of new market types in the exchange of goods,
services, and money. Also, digital capitalism necessitates new work
categories due to the fact that digital technologies serve as labor devices
and infrastructure and so having a key role in certain production methods,
as digital media are today both productive technologies and methods, which
means that digital capitalism generates new managerial approaches because
digital technologies are utilized as managerial means within corporations. It
has to be taken into account that the relationship between digital capitalism
and the digital/AI economy is that digital platforms have a key role in
permitting people to become independent contractors working as
freelancers, while employers choose the individuals that best fit their
requirements.47
2.5 The Market, Banks, and Cash Management
It has to be taken into account that the market has risky assets, traded by
informed investors, noise traders, and competitive market makers.
Moreover, information transmits from the less informed investor to the
more informed investor. Also, market competence advances or market
liquidity degenerates according to the characteristics of the less informed
investors’ information, and so, total trading volume can be higher or
lower.48 To that extent, Itay Goldstein et al.49 argue that
“the well-informed investor never shares in-formation because
doing so only dissipates his informational advantage and
erodes his profit accordingly…an investor with coarse
information optimally chooses to share information with a
well-informed investor, because the former benefits from the
latter trading against the shared information, which therefore
dampens the former’s price impact. By contrast, the well-

informed investor never shares in-formation because doing so
only dissipates his informational advantage and erodes his
profit accordingly”.
It is representative that interactions among investors are influencing trading
strategies and financial market outcomes. Taking into account that sharing
information is costly to investors due to the fact that it diminishes their
informational gain, it is vital to understand the assistance investors get from
sharing information.50
Banks wield deposit market power by investing in capital and, by
holding reserves, circumvent costly liquidity deficiencies but do not entirely
internalize the benefits. Anyway, banks put their positions/titles to hedge
funds as a result of the higher balance sheet costs inflicted on banks by
regulatory alterations, such as the launch of the leverage ratio after the
global financial crisis. It has to be taken into consideration that the central
bank’s selection of deposit subsidies and interest on reserves influences the
cost structure of banks, their price setting, and so the liquidity premium on
deposits. More bank market power necessitates a higher deposit subsidy to
inspire banks to lengthen their balance sheets. To that extent, Dirk Niepelt51
argues that
“unlike in the single-tier system, optimal policy in the two-tier
system with its distortions requires fiscal resources or
regulation to correct them. Dead weight losses of taxation or
regulation therefore add to the social costs of the two-tier, but
not the single-tier, payment system”.
It is well known that banks are fragile, encompassing the likelihood of
individual banks suffering a run, as a result of the provision of liquidity
transformation and ultimately interlocked through fire-sale spillovers.
Moreover, when facing withdrawals, banks liquidate their assets in a
common market, which means that they compel negative fire-sale
externalities on one another. Nonetheless, reducing bank fragility is
welfare-improving for the reason that runs are linked to real resource losses
owing to fire sales, and so, stabilizing the financial sector is an objective for

the regulator which means that regulators have to maintain strong banks
because the fragility of strong banks affects weak banks on the margin but
not vice versa.52
The banking industry is undergoing a digital revolution53 and so FinTech
corporations and BigTech platforms are involved in conventional banking
businesses using their innovative information and automation technologies.
Also, “open banking” empowers borrowers to disclose their customer data
stored in a bank with a fintech that has AI information processing
technology but less access to customer data. Moreover, open banking
