1.6 Metaverse in Finance
AI and robotics technologies are amalgamated in several economic sectors
such as financial trading and analysis. Algorithmic trading, driven by ΑAI
algorithms has transformed market dynamics by permitting  automated
execution of trades. Hence, the integration of AI and finance has reformed
the financial landscape, and by utilizing AAI, the speed, security , and
efficiency of financial markets are improved. In line with this, blockchain
technology , augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR) have allowed
the materialization of the metaverse81 being a virtual space where people
interact comparably to the real world. To that extent, the metaverse is linked
to the crypto-metaverse as a result of the strong integration of blockchain
technology and cryptocurrenci es into virtual environments.82 In other
words, the metaverse is a principal environment for the conception, trading,
and ownership of digital assets and cryptocurrencies, generating the
metaverse spher e for the global financial market. Thus, digital art, virtual
real estate, and gaming tokens are acquired, sold, and traded within a digital
terrain with the assistance of metaverse cryptocurrency coins and tokens. In
Italy, tokens have been conside red as “digital assets” under the provisions
of Article 810 of the Italian Civil Code83 and in France84 tokens are
regarded as “incorporeal assets.”
DeFi platforms are looking for opportunities within the metaverse, which
means that users are involved in DeFi services like borrowing, lending, and
gaining profit without leaving the virtual world. Blockchain technology and
cryptocurrencies not only advan ce accessibility but also launch new ways
for earning and employing cryptocurrencies. Thus, the metaver se alters the
complexion of financial services  which means that virtual banks, insurance
companies, and investment platforms materialize within this digital world,
presenting users with an alternative to conventional financial institutions.
To that extent, smart contracts automate financial agreements, diminishing
the requirement for intermediaries and intensifying the effectiveness of
transactions. Thus, incorporating the metaverse into finance boosts global
financial system accessibility by eliminating traditional barrie rs, inspiring
innovation in financial services that lead to new products and solutions, and
stimulating financial inclusion.85
Fintech is transforming finance and contesting current regulations linked
to financial inclusion. Moreover , virtual banking is distinguished from
electronic bank ing owing to its absence of any reliance on physical
infrastructure.86 While virtual banks run exclusively online, traditional
banks can offer more banking options in advancing market choice and, by
this means stimulating financial inclusion without inevitably being digital.
Hence, virtual banks, fintech start-ups, and online-based payment firms
enter the supply side, advancing market selection and so, amplifying
financial inclusion. Also, virtual banks boost financial inclusion by
providing easier  and faster bank account opening, easier modes to deliver
identity for compliance with KYC requirements,87 and algorithmically
driven decision- making for loan approval. On the other hand, traditional
banks and virtual banks are subject to the same regulatory supervisory
standards.88
Interoperability among digital platforms89 is a key attribute of the
metaverse90 and so the metaverse represents  a prospective “parallel judicial
universe, an independent meta-system with its own virtual jurisdiction.”91
It has to be taken into account that when a publicly traded company is
attacked, the damage extends beyond the organization, causing financial
losses to shareholders. To that extent, the appearance of the metaverse
increases the attack surface for malicious players by generating  more entry
points for malwa re and data breaches. In line with this, by selling encrypted
data back to its original owners,  offenders obtain profits from personal data
that had little value on the black market. Thus, digitizati on and the
explosive growth of online business have caused cyberattacks, and
corporations have become attractive targets. For the reason that
corporations have centralized their data into information networks to
augment competence, consumer data are more easily tar geted in an attack.92