1.2 Bitcoin as Money
It has to be considered that there is no need to distinguish the character of
the transactions to assess a currency as a medium of exchange.8 A currency
being a safe store of value is the key element for a means of being money ,
which is questionable at the moment, for digital/virtual currencies.
Nakamoto9 was persuaded that the internet needed a currency that was, like
it, decentralized, protected by cryptography , and favorable for peer-to-peer
exchange. A group with pseudo-Libertarian political beliefs finds Bitcoin
attractive owing to its lack of connection to any government, adhering
openly to distrust of the world financial system, and the timing of Bitcoin’ s
introduction, corresponding to the very bottom of the global financial crisis
in 2008–2009.
Bitcoin10 is a non-fiat cryptographic electronic payment system that
claims to be the world’ s first cryptocurrency . It is a peer-to-peer, client-
based, entirely distributed curre ncy that is not based on centralized issuing
bodies being a “sovereign” to function. The value is produced by the users,
and the procedure is executed by utilizing an open-source client installed on
any computer running Windows , Mac, Linux,11 etc. In Spain, the judgment
of the Supreme Court12 20/06/2019 denied the recognition of Bitcoin as
legal tender (money) but considered it an “incorporeal asset.”
Bitcoin is a homogeneous, virtual good that is entirely identical across
all the online markets in which it is sold. The blockchain is a shared public
ledger on which the entire Bitcoin network relies. It must be considered that
network economics is a new field within the information society , and its
principle is that products and services are produced and value is added via
networks functioning on large or global scales. This is in contrast to
industrial-era economies, in which ownership of physical or intellectual
property originated from a single enterprise.13
On the one hand, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled that
Bitcoin was a virtual currency and that it could be accepted by the parties as
a non-c orporate means of payment.14 On the other hand, the Pays era
judgment15 highlights that
“the definition of electronic money , which is considered to be
any monetary value stored by electronic or magnetic means
which represents a claim on the issuer , is issued on receipt of
funds for the purpose of making payment transactions (…),
and which is accepted by a natural or legal person other than
the issuer of electronic money .”
To that extent, the Advocate General16 underlines that
“Bitcoin is not money as it does not fulfil the three functions
of money: it is not a medium of exchange, nor a store of value,
nor a unit of account. These assets are not backed or managed
by any central entity , nor is there any guarantee that they can
be exchanged for cash. They are slow , costly and cannot be
used to pay everyday bills. Its transactions are slow , costly ,
and cannot be used to pay everyday bills. It is not issued by
any central public authority , and it does not have the same
level of trust as an of ficial currency such as the euro, which is
backed by the central banks of the euro area.”
Hence, the Advocate General judges e-money to be Proton, miniCASH,
Moneo, Geldkar te, and PayPal, and so, for the Advocate General, money is
only stored in a network, the medium is “computerized” or virtual, and
Bitcoin is not electronic money . Thus, the Advocate General’ s view
disagrees with the opinions articulated by the CJEU in the Hedqvist
judgment, wher e it deems Bitco in to be a virtual currency , which is legal
money for the reason that it is understood to be within the autonomy of the
parties and what  they consider to have value, and is eventually the object of
exchange between them.
Bitcoin is differentiated from fiat money since it does not have the
agency costs of public money . John O. McGinnis17 argues that
“If Bitcoin is to grow into a more stable currency , it will need
financial intermediaries to do so…Thus, even for a
cryptocurrency like Bitcoin that should not itself be regulated,
there is this paradox: to succeed, these structures currently
seem to require financial intermediaries to function optimally
and those intermediaries create the very agency problems that
Bitcoin is designed to avoid.”
It is argued that Bitcoin does not entail faith in any public institution that
creates money; on the other hand, it seems to be recognized that financial
intermediaries are needed for its operation, which means going back to fiat
money .
It is worth mentioning here that in order to flourish as a currency , Bitcoin
and any other similar crypto require the same kind of financial mechanisms
used to deepen the market for other financial assets, which means enabling
price discovery and exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”). Also, while crypto
was activated as a movement to free people’ s financial business es from the
state, now the government is getting into the digital asset game with central
bank digital currency (“CBDC”).
It has to be taken into account that the Bitcoin network operates as a
public notary for all transactions conducted on the network, leaving a trace
of what has transpired in the virtual universe, in cyberspace.18 It is worth
mentioning here that cryptocurr encies are deemed to be volatile and lack
trustworthy information, making them dangerous investm ents.19 The
absence of regulatory certainty is a “massive barrier” to responsible
innovation in the crypto ecosystem.20 Furthermore, cryptocurrency is
described as digital money based on blockchain techno logy. It is
characteristic that Michael Conklin21 considers that “corporate inves tment
in cryptocurrencies and the acceptance of cryptocurrencies as payment
violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics…accepting
cryptocurrency for payment and holding cryptocurrency as an investment
clearly violates the stakeholder theory of corporate ethics.”
Payments and money transfers are the most obvious application of the
distributed public ledger technology . Bitcoin transaction costs are much
lower than those of traditional financial networks. The develop ment of the
“blockchain” is the innovativ e aspect of Bitcoin, which is a large
decentralized database that has distinctive identifiers for each user and each
Bitcoin. Moreover , virtual currencies and Bitcoin have the potential to
revolutionize the means by which payments are processed, but only if they
become ever-present.22 Could a broadly  used virtual currency pose a risk to
the stability of the financial system as a whole and to the economy more
generally? It could be said that a virtual currency can be transfo rmative if it
is widely adopted, and a widely adopted virtual currency can threaten the