requested that the intern review the data set and be prepared to discuss. An excerpt of the data follows.
	 1.	 The intern stated, “Reviewing the data set, I classified VendorID as a measured raw data field 
source.” Explain why VendorID should be considered non-measured raw data.
	 2.	 The intern stated, “The VendorQuality data field must be considered ratio data because we can 
analyze this as a variable in our analysis.” Explain why the VendorQuality data field should not be 
considered ratio data.
	 3.	 The intern said, “The ItemCost and ItemQty data fields can be combined to create a calculated data 
field.” Explain why this is correct.
	 4.	 Based on your review of the excerpt of the data set, what data risks would you expect the intern to identify?
	 5.	 Assume you asked the intern to verify the accuracy of the PO number 2006. What would the intern 
review to determine if the data in the database is accurate?

Brief Exercises  4-49
BE 4.6  (LO 2)  For each of the following, identify if the data field is a (MRD) measured raw data field, a 
(NRD) non-measured raw data field, or a (CAL) calculated field.
	___ 1.  ProductIdentificationCode
___ 2.  UnitCost for each inventory item
___ 3.  TotalCost
___ 4.  GrossProfit
___ 5.  ProductCategory
___ 6.  NumberOnHand in the warehouse of each product
BE 4.7  (LO 3)  Identify the objective of each of the following analysis strategies as
describe, diagnose, predict, or prescribe.
Strategy
Objective
	 1.	Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end open invoices on days outstanding 
to understand what is happening in accounts receivable.
	 2.	Estimating cost savings and productivity increases from new AIS 
investments.
	 3.	Creating dollar value stratified sampling plans for investment asset 
accounts.
	 4.	Counting and ranking web server security incidents by week.
	 5.	Estimating product revenue increases by product from marketing 
campaigns.
	 6.	Estimating future cash flows from a continuing current operations 
strategy.
	 7.	Calculating before-after cost reductions from system investments.
	 8.	Testing different tax planning strategies by evaluating future cash savings.
	 9.	Estimating inventory counts at year-end by sampling a few of the stores 
and making population inferences.
	10.	Frequency counts for unfulfilled or open-partial sales orders so that they 
can be resolved.
BE 4.8  (LO 3)  For each data structure and analysis listed for descriptive and diagnostic objectives, indi-
cate whether the analysis can be performed with a “Yes” or “No.”
___ 1.  The calculation of the mode on categorical data.
___ 2.  The variance dispersion of ordinal data.
___ 3.  The calculation of median on interval data.
___ 4.  Cumulative frequency distributions on categorical data.
___ 5.  A visualization of categorical data trends.
___ 6.  Cross tabulation correlations of ratio data.
BE 4.9  (LO 3)  For each data structure and analysis listed for predictive and prescriptive objectives, indi-
cate whether the analysis can be performed with a “Yes” or “No.”
___ 1.  Trendlines on categorical data.
___ 2.  Regression analysis of ordinal data.
___ 3.  Optimization modeling of interval data.
___ 4.  Regression analysis of categorical data.
___ 5.  What-if analysis of ratio data.
___ 6.  Trendlines on ratio data.
BE 4.10  (LO 4)  Auditing   For each of the following data strategies used by auditors, provide at least 
one risk that should be controlled to rely on the results of the analysis.
	 1.	 Sampling the clients’ transactions by the size of the transactions impacting an account.
	 2.	 Comparing the estimations and assumptions used by management this year to last year.
	 3.	 Requesting confirmations of all year-end bank account, accounts receivable, and accounts payable 
balances.

4-50  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
BE 4.11  (LO 4)  Accounting Information Systems   For each of the following analyses strategies for 
AIS projects, identify whether the project’s objective is descriptive or diagnostic (D) or predictive or pre-
scriptive (P):
Strategy
Objective
	 1.	Calculating the average amount of time each department in the revenue 
cycle takes to perform its function per order.
	 2.	Calculating the cost savings expected from moving to RFID (radio free 
identification) technologies for inventory identification, pricing, and 
costing.
	 3.	Estimating how much server space would be needed for the AIS if sales 
revenues were to increase by 10% each year for the next five years.
	 4.	Detecting at which times of day and by which channel the unauthorized 
access is occurring to the customer relationship management module.
BE 4.12  (LO 4)  Financial Accounting   Assume you are a financial accountant tasked with selecting 
the best ­financing alternative for your organization. Suggest a data strategy and an analysis strategy for 
this objective.
Exercises
EX 4.1  (LO 1)  Match Project Plan Components Match the data analysis project plan component to 
each of the following statements:
	 a.	 Project objectives and questions
	 b.	 Data strategy
	 c.	 Analysis strategy
	 d.	 Critical risks
	 e.	 Embedded controls
	___ 1.  Verifying data values for reasonableness.
	___ 2.  Data formatting that must be transformed before analysis.
	___ 3.  Predicting next year’s sales volume.
	___ 4.  Sales volume data.
	___ 5.  Using regression analysis to predict next year’s sales volume.
	___ 6.  Diagnosing what is causing the cost overruns in the production process.
	___ 7.  Use of different scales on the y-axis and x-axis across visualizations.
EX 4.2  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Financial Accounting   Design a Data Strategy and an 
Analysis Strategy Assume your motivation for performing data analysis is to maximize sales revenues. 
Your specific objective questions are to determine whether sales volume is increasing, stable, or dropping 
for each of your company’s product lines this year compared to last year. Describe one possible data strat-
egy and analysis strategy for this objective.
EX 4.3  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   Match Data Strat-
egy Choices Match each objective to the following data selections.
	 a.	 Labor cost data
	 b.	 Production run data
	 c.	 Past marketing strategy data
	 d.	 IT service satisfaction survey data
	 e.	 Online market sales data
	 f.	 Sales contract data
	___ 1.  What is causing our large production materials usage variance?
	___ 2.  Which marketing strategy is most likely to increase our market share?
	___ 3.  Are we in compliance with U.S. GAAP procedures for revenue recognition?
	___ 4.  Which of our product lines could be sold online as well as in the store?
	___ 5.  Is the turnover in our IT staff impacting their service to the other functional areas?
	___ 6.  Are our payroll costs increasing?

Exercises  4-51
EX 4.4  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Design Data Strategies The following is a list of the avail-
able fields in a data set from a pet supply store.
Data Field
Description
	 1.	PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
	 2.	VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
	 3.	VendorName
Vendor name
	 4.	VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional
	 5.	VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
	 6.	VendorCity
Mailing address city
	 7.	VendorState
Mailing address state
	 8.	VendorZip
Mailing address zip
	 9.	VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor
	10.	PODate
Purchase order date
	11.	POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number
	12.	POItemDescription
Description of item
	13.	ItemCost
Cost of the inventory item per negotiated terms with vendor
	14.	ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased
For each of the following objectives (a, b, c), identify the minimum data fields (1-14) you would select for 
your data strategy:
	 a.	 Your objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases, so you want to identify which 
vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year.
	 b.	 Your objective is to determine which inventory items have the greatest cost increases over the past 
five years.
	 c.	 Your objective is to identify the five vendors from whom you made the highest value of purchases 
last year.
EX 4.5  (LO 2)  Prepare a Project Plan You graduate in one month from your undergraduate program. 
Your objective is to successfully apply to both professional jobs and graduate school. In your applica-
tion materials, you want to show how your grades improved as you moved from your general education 
courses to the courses in your major. Describe your data strategy, your analysis strategy, and three possi-
ble risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.6  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Data Strategy Risks and Controls Assume your data anal-
ysis objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases from vendors. Your analysis strategy is 
to identify which vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year. You have selected 
the following data fields for your data strategy.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
VendorName
Vendor name
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
VendorCity
Mailing address city
VendorState
Mailing address state
VendorZip
Mailing address zip
PODate
Purchase order date
Identify three data risks and data controls you could use for those risks.

4-52  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
EX 4.7  (LO 3)  Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are an internal 
auditor working with your company’s outdoor gear sales department to devise a new strategy for sales 
commissions that incentivizes higher profits than your current flat commission strategy. Describe a data 
strategy, an analysis strategy and three possible risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.8  (LO 3)  Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are a managerial accountant 
for Sihrya’s Beauty Supply Store. You have been asked to predict next year’s contribution margin. A sam-
ple of the available data for your analysis is included here.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Receipt Number
SaleReceiptNo
Sales Date
Saledate
Inventory Code
InvCode
Number Sold
NoSold
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Describe a data strategy, an analysis strategy, and three possible risks you need to control by providing 
control suggestions.
EX 4.9  (LO 3)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You work 
as a financial analyst for a large coffee shop chain, such as Starbucks. Your objective is to diagnose which 
stores have increasing sales. Your data strategy is to use the store sales monthly data from the past two 
years. Design an analysis strategy, including which risks you should consider and controls that would 
help mitigate those risks.
EX 4.10  (LO 1- 4)  Auditing   Accounting Information Systems   Prepare a Project Plan You are 
working in the accounting information systems group at your company. You have been asked to evaluate 
the internal controls associated with authentication of users into the information system. Your manager 
has asked you to perform a descriptive analysis of failed login attempts. Your manager has provided you 
with the analysis objective and question. Using the chart, document your data and analysis choices and 
risks and controls for each.
Objective and Questions
Data and  
Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Evaluate internal 
controls associated with 
authentication of users
Questions: What are the mean, 
median, standard deviation, 
and distribution of failed login 
attempts during the current year?
1. Data:
2. Analysis:
3. Data:
4. Analysis:
5. Data:
6. Analysis:

Exercises  4-53
EX 4.11  (LO 1-4)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting Prepare a Project Plan You 
are a financial analyst at Sihrya’s Beauty Salon. The company owner has asked you to perform data anal-
yses to understand the products that contribute to the salon’s retail store’s profitability. The owner pro-
vided you a data dictionary, presented here, describing data that you may consider using in your analysis.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Receipt Number
ReceiptNo
POS assigned receipt number uniquely 
identifying each sale.
Sales Date
SaleDate
Date of sale per the POS.
Inventory Code
InvCode
Unique inventory identification number 
for each product in the salon’s retail store.
Number Sold
NoSold
Quantity of items sold.
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Description of the inventory item.
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Gross sales price of the inventory item.
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Weighted average cost of the inventory 
item.
	 1.	 State the owner’s objective for your data analysis project.
	 2.	 Assume your analysis question is to identify the products that have the highest gross profit. Identify 
the data fields you should include in your analysis. Identify the data analysis choices to answer this 
analysis question.
	 3.	 Identify risks and the related control choices related to the analysis question.
EX 4.12  (LO 1-4)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Select a Data Strategy and Perform an Analy-
sis You are a managerial accountant working at a multi-location pet care retail company. Your supervisor 
has asked you to compare the dollar amount of purchases made from each vendor in December 2024 
compared to December 2025. After discussing with your supervisor, you have identified the following:
Objective: Compare total purchases by vendor in December 2024 and December 2025.
Question: In 2024 and 2025, from which vendors were the most purchases (in dollars) made? 
Data: You have access to the following data.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number.
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number.
VendorName
Vendor name.
VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional.
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name.
VendorCity
Mailing address city.
VendorState
Mailing address state.
VendorZip
Mailing address zip.
VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor.
PODate
Purchase order date.
POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number.
POItemDescription
Description of item.
ItemCost
Cost of the item per negotiated terms with vendor.
ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased.
	 1.	 Which data items would you use in your data strategy?
	 2.	 Design an analysis strategy to identify the vendor or vendors in which the company had a higher 
dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.
	 3.	 Perform the analysis per your analysis strategy. Identify the vendors in which the company had a 
higher dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.

4-54  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Problems
PR 4.1  (LO 1- 4)  Data   Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Complete Project Plan You work in 
