from data. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a collection of arti -
ficial neurons (also known as units) that receive data as an input, and 
then logic is applied to produce an output. ANNs are frequently used 
for pattern recognition such as facial recognition in pictures and vi -
deos, speech recognition, social networks, etc., frequently accelerated 
by tensor processing. A tensor processing unit (TPU) is an application- 
specific circuit developed by Google that is used to increase processing speeds for machine learning and deep learning applications. Whereas traditional machine learning relies heavily on the guidance provided by 
human programmers, DL models use ANNs (inspired by the biolo
-
gical neural networks found in human brains) to analyze large volumes 
of data to teach itself. 
Deep learning can be used in a variety of applications, such as facial 
recognition, image classification, speech recognition, and text transla -
tion. Current applications of DL include self-driving vehicles that slow 
down as it approaches a pedestrian cross-walk, ATM machines that 
reject a counterfeit banknote, and a smartphone app that translates the image of a street sign in a foreign language (The Mathworks & 
MATLAB, 2018). 
EY uses deep learning technology to reconstruct documents (e.g., 
invoices and contracts used during an audit) that were poorly- scanned using optical recognition software (Duffy, 2019). Researcher 
Sophia Sun (2019) promotes the use of DL to support audit decision making in two key areas: information identification and judgment 
support. DL algorithms can analyze semi-structured data (e.g., text 
data from supporting documents such as invoices, contracts, etc.) 
and unstructured data (such as images, audio, and video from the 
internet, social media, etc.), which will aid in information identifi
-
cation. Further, Sun notes that the predictive performance of DL 
models is superior to classic machine learning when the volume of 
data and the number of variables is large. To maximize the use of DL 
in an audit context, Sun suggests designing and developing a data warehouse to train the algorithms to make predictions and assist 
with audit procedures. 
Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of AI that focuses on 
the interaction of computers and people using human languages. The 
Siri application on Apple’s iPhone and Amazon’s Alexa uses NLP to 
understand requests for completing a task. 10 What Accountants Need to Know 
NLP can be broken down into two types: natural language under -
standing and natural language generation. 
Natural language understanding (NLU) enables computers to un -
derstand instructions provided in human language. For example, when 
a user asks their iPhone for weather conditions by using the following voice command, “Hey Siri, what’s the latest weather?” Siri under
-
stands their command and retrieves the information by searching on the Internet. 
Natural language generation (NLG) enables computers to produce 
human language so that people can understand computers. After Siri performed a search of the latest weather, it replies with an answer such 
as the following example: “it’s currently clear and 28 degrees in 
Philadelphia. Expect partly cloudy skies starting tonight. Today’s high 
will be 33 degrees, and the low will be 23 degrees”. Siri understood that 
the user was asking it to look up the weather conditions at a specific 
location and time, and then returned the results in spoken English 
words. NLG can also convert data visualizations, such as charts and graphs, into a verbal description that can be understood by humans 
(CPA Canada & AICPA, 2019). 
The potential for using NLP in accounting is substantial, as it 
can be used to process and analyze large amounts of data. NLP has been used to analyze various textual documents related to corpo
-
rate financial performance and compliance with accounting stan -
dards and regulations (Fisher et al., 2016). Text mining uses NLP to extract meaning from textual data. Applications of NLP include 
text mining components such as semantics analysis, text classifi
-
cation, text summarization, and text translation. Additional ap -
plications include speech recognition, question-answering systems, and chatbots. 
Data Mining 
Data mining is a process of analyzing large data sets (i.e., “big data”) 
to discover previously unknown patterns or relationships. Data mining 
tools are typically applied to structured data, that is, highly formatted 
data contained in relational databases such as in an ERP system and, 
therefore, can be very helpful for accountants. 
As illustrated in Figure 1.2, data mining intersects with but is not 
considered a subfield of AI. As computer scientist Xavier Amatriain notes, “machine learning can be used for data. However, data mining can use 
other techniques on top of machine learning” (Amatriain, 2016, para. 5). What Accountants Need to Know 11 
Like machine learning, data mining relies on reading large 
amounts of data to discover patterns and arrive at conclusions. 
However, technology expert Bernard Marr identified notable dif -
ferences between data mining and machine learning. First, data mining looks for patterns that already exist in historical data, whereas ML attempts to predict future outcomes based on the given 
data. Second, the rules or patterns are unknown at the beginning of 
the data mining process, whereas the rules are programmed into the computer to understand the data with machine learning. Third, data 
mining relies on human intervention throughout the process, 
whereas much of the learning with ML is automatic. Finally, data 
mining uses an existing data set, such as a data warehouse, whereas 
ML learns from a training data set and then makes predictions using 