enhances the fintech’s screening competence, but, on the other hand, it
diminishes lending competition and harms borrowers if the fintech
corporation is “over-empowered” by the data sharing means.54 Also, banks
with higher IT adoption have larger loan growth due to the fact that an
enhancement of a lender’s IT augments its lending volume.55 Cyberspace
and AI employment exaggerate bank competition, resulting in lower banks’
loan prices.56 Also, companies’ lending by banks with higher IT adoption is
less influenced by the distance between the bank headquarters and their
borrowers. To that extent, Xavier Vives and Zhiqiang Ye57 argue that
“whether the development of information technology intensifies lender
competition depends on its impact on differentiation.”
Reliability of the market is decisive for financial stability. Capital
regulation is a path through which accounting rules influence bank behavior
and financial stability. It is worth mentioning here that some lenders might
be part of criminal organizations that use IML to launder money and
conceal profits from other criminal activities due to the fact that borrowers,
discarded by any legal creditor, invest IML loans encompassing gambling,
drugs, and alcohol. Moreover, the existence of IML is boosted by the
extensive global adoption of interest rate caps limiting access to legal credit
for risky borrowers, which means forwarding claims for illegal lending, and
so, illegal money lending is dominant across the globe.58 To that extent, K.
Leong59 et al. argue that
“the crackdown was highly successful at lowering the payoffs
of lenders and borrowers in the market, as well as lowering
the total volume of loans disbursed. Removing borrowers

from the market, either through offering formal market
alternatives, rehabilitation or education programs, also hurts
lenders, particularly if they focus on medium-performing
borrowers in terms of loan repayment time”.
It is worth noting that high leverage coupled with short-term funding when
exploited to finance risky assets is very instable exposing banks to runs,
which means that banks’ disclosures concerning exposures to risky assets
and funding structures play an imperative part in banks’ stability. On the
one hand, more wide-ranging disclosures offer relevant information
regarding exposures to problematic assets and so diminishing uncertainty.
On the other hand, more disclosures generate bank runs, initiating a panic
among investors. To that extent, Jannis Bischof60 et al. argue that “banks’
disclosures about relevant risk exposures as well as the accounting
recognition of loan losses came late, relative to the evolution of the crisis
and concurrent market expectations. Many banks apparently were reluctant
to communicate and recognize their losses.”
Taking into account that a financial system encompasses interrelated
fragilities, several elements influence financial stability by altering bank
heterogeneity. Hence, regulatory policies limiting the dispersion in bank
asset performances generate a damaging course for stability because when
strong banks are forced to liquidate their assets, the asset market is harmed
as a result of massive liquidations by weak banks.61 To that extent, I.
Goldstein62 et al. argue that “a certain difference between banks’ resistance
to a common set of stress scenarios is desirable…Regulators should take a
holistic approach and combine different regulatory tools to maintain a
certain level of heterogeneity in the financial system.”
It is characteristic that banks create value by lending and cash
management, thus generating broad and persistent economic value.
Moreover, cash management services amplify the value of a corporation’s
reputational capital. It is well known that cash management services move
the supply and demand for products in wholesale and retail markets. On the
other hand, functioning without cash management augments both
counterparty risk and administrative costs by forcing suppliers to transport,
verify, and store cash which, otherwise, financial institutes direct. It has to

be taken into account that problems regarding cash management services
generate a “clientele effect,” permitting them to sell at a price premium,
which means that retail customers assign a lower marginal value to products
sold at “dispensaries” without cash management.63 In line with this, E. A.
Berger and N. Seegert64 argue that “businesses with cash management
charge higher retail prices (8.3%), pay lower wholesale prices (7.3%), and
have higher sales volume (19%). Together, these advantages create a 40%
increase in profitability.”
Furthermore, cash management services, such as safe storage,
verification, and guarantee of funds, delivered by financial institutions yield
substantial economic value for corporations and in case that corporations
lack these services, they have to get alternatives offering internal
warehousing of cash, which incurs costs to transactions and so switching
resources from core trade. On the other hand, without warehousing,
corporations utilizing digital banking, cryptocurrencies, and fintech
solutions bear the costs of developing infrastructure to perform these
functions. In line with this, E. A. Berger and N. Seegert65 argue that “the
benefits of warehousing exist regardless of whether national banks, credit
unions, or fintech provide these warehousing functions.”
It is characteristic that considerable value to investors arises not only
from financial planning concerning portfolio construction but also from
cash flow planning and benefits offered by plan optimization, bringing forth
rewards from upgraded financial well-being. Corporations make
investment, cash savings, cash payments, equity financing, and payout
decisions to maximize their value. In addition, corporations hold more net
financial assets for the reason that equity has become cheaper relative to
debt. Taking into account that only tangible capital is pledgeable and the
increase in intangible capital usage, corporations hold more cash.66
Negative cash flows generate a stronger cash flow volatility impact on cash
restrictions, causing the noticeable drop of corporation’s value. It is worth
noting that cash flow timing patterns offer valuable insights into corporate
fundamentals and corporations’ exposure to aggregate risks, embracing
effects for asset prices67 and real quantities. Nonetheless, financially
constrained corporations exhibit a more noteworthy cash flow timing
pattern. Hence, financially constrained corporations with higher year-end

cash collections gain a higher risk premium. There is a link between
realized macroeconomic variables and asset prices.68 In line with this, W.
He69 et al. argue that “Macroeconomic perceptions generate the cross-
sectional financing, investment, and valuation differences, thus driving the
time variation in these equity market anomalies.”
Financially constrained corporations have high financing requirements,
and so financially constrained corporations with high equity financing
demands collect cash payments70 by year end to circumvent the high
agency cost of year-end unpaid revenue. In line with this, W. Hu71 et al.
argue that “year-end cash collection leads to more risk exposure and higher
stock returns.” It has to be taken into consideration that riskier corporations,
encompassing a higher link between cash flow and the aggregate shock,
have higher financing demands, which means higher optimal savings.
While high cash collection diminishes profitability, higher cash collection
indicates greater information transparency and thus reduces the cost of
accessing the financial market.72 To that extent, W. Hu73 et al. argue that
“Immediate cash payments negatively affect profitability, but
reduce equity financing costs by increasing information
transparency. Financially constrained firms optimally collect
more cash at year-end when firms’ performance attracts more
attention and information transparency is more valuable. Such
behavior further results in greater exposure to aggregate
productivity and financial shocks”.
First of all, subjective prospects influence corporate behaviors such as
investments and external financing, while the evidence of biased corporate
returns and growth prospects shapes corporate-level investment and
external financing. Moreover, positive expectations of aggregate
productivity inspire optimism among both corporate managers and
investors, causing an increase in external financing and investment, a fall in
financing costs, an upsurge in contemporary equity prices, and thus cutting
a subsequent return. It is characteristic that activities of financially
constrained corporations are more influenced by misvaluation shocks or

behavioral biases such as overoptimism. Consequently, with an upward
revision in prospects of aggregate productivity, financially constrained
corporations issue a lot of actually low-quality debt. In the interim,
managers could deliver overpriced equity and debt to utilize investor
optimism, which means subsequent return reversals for financially
constrained corporations. To that extent, W. He74 et al. argue that
“following upward revisions in expectations of
macroeconomic conditions, subsequent equity returns are
relatively low for small, risky, unprofitable, low-quality, and
financially distressed firms. On the other hand, following
downward revisions in expectations of macroeconomic
conditions, these categories of firms earn relatively high
subsequent returns. Thus, revisions in expectations of
macroeconomic conditions induce strong predictable time
variations in anomalies based on these characteristics. In
particular, favorable revisions in expectations of aggregate
productivity predict stronger profitability, quality, and low-
risk anomalies but weaker value, investment, and size
anomalies”.
In fact, financial constraints augment the mispricing instigated by credit
sentiment or extrapolation.75 Also, macroeconomic movements and
monetary policy actions have a greater influence on the contemporary
fundamentals and returns of financially constrained corporations. Moreover,
the investment and debt issuance of corporations with lower credit scores
are vulnerable to credit conditions.
It seems that bank borrowers count on credit lines to manage cash flow
shocks, and lenders charge borrowers for liquidity provision. Moreover,
corporations functioning with old capital are riskier for the reason that
costly technology adoption hampers their flexibility in progressing to the
latest technology, making them more subject to technology frontier shocks.
Also, corporations embrace the latest capital or keep running with the
existing mode, which is turning out to be outdated and less valuable over

time, meaning that by undertaking the latest technology, a more competent
capital is instated.76 It has to be taken into account that gross investment is
larger when the corporation’s capital is inadequate, given that current
capital cannot be utilized for the operation of the new technology.
Furthermore, 
expensive 
new 
technology 
implementation 
hampers
corporations’ flexibility in updating their capital stock concerning
technology, furthering the risk dispersion between technology-adopting
corporations and non-adopting ones.
Corporations use cash management to foster reputational capital,
permitting them to demand better terms in the wholesale market and
advancing quality guarantees to consumers in the retail market. The Total
Cash Management System lets MNE to produce positive cash flow,
ensuring its operational use to cause future cash flows which means that the
application of Total Cash Management supplies a platform for both present
and long-term objectives in the international financial management of
MNEs, and so a MNE has a prospective to get financial resources owing to
the geography of its undertakings. Hence, MNEs have easy access to the
devices of both local and global financial markets, and so MNEs have to
choose the most effective financial resources and their sustainable
management. To that extent, crypto assets provide a new way of financing
MNEs.
MNEs have a high credit rating, allowing them to access cheaper
resources and the availability of liquid assets and intensive cash flow let
MNEs to diminish the cost of obtained capital, real sales evolution, and an
upsurge of investment attractiveness, which means offering financial
stability and opportunities for obtaining capital. Moreover, MNEs are
amalgamated into the global financial system, and their finances are its
structural elements, allowing leading global banks to offer conditions for
the transparency of their activities and thus escalating the opportunities to
obtain debt funds from credit organizations. Corporations and MNEs try to
raise financing when banks cut lending.77 On the other hand, there are
shortcomings for MNEs due to currency, transaction, political, and
economic risks affecting the decision regarding the selection of financial
resources.78

2.6 Venture Capital and AI
VCs have a decisive role in the economy as a result of their uneven
contribution to corporate R&D and innovation. Moreover, VCs offer
liquidity to founders, tempting them to become entrepreneurs.79 In line with
this, Michael Ewens80 et al. argue that
“while a post-product increase in cash compensation makes
founding a startup more attractive than a contract that pays a
flat salary, low pre-product compensation can still leave high
earning potential founders holding substantial non-
diversifiable risk…variation in the expected time to product
development is a key driver of the relative attractiveness of
entrepreneurship across sectors for potential founders with
attractive options outside of entrepreneurship and in sufficient
personal wealth to finance consumption while waiting for a
product to materialize”.
It is worth mentioning here that AI utilization across businesses is on the
uptick; however, there is some concern regarding the use of AI, involving
algorithmic aversion and fear of machine bias.81 Taking into account that an
algorithm is as good as the data it works with, AI can identify and correct
human bias, and multiple devices exist that identify and adjust for such.82
VC evolved to fund promising startups that otherwise lacked the
established presence required to safeguard business loans in exchange for
an equity position. Regardless of the advances in AI and VC’s focus on tech
startups, VC corporations themselves have failed to employ data analytics
and machine learning in their own decision-making, relying instead on
copying the investments of other corporations. The use of AI by VC
corporations advances investment outcomes.83 Moreover, VC has shifted
away from that of an advisor offering governance and oversight to startups,
to that of a speculative hands-off financier. Even though originally VCs
played active management roles in delivering both oversight and corporate
