from the perfect model, variance measures how far oﬀ the
model predictions are from each other. Typically, bias and
variance have competing properties, and improving one
usually compromises the other. That is, a low-bias model has
high variance, and a high-bias model has low variance.15 As
seen in Figure 6.9, with the increase in model complexity model
bias decreases but variance increases. The art is to ﬁnd a model
with the right level of complexity that has low bias and low
variance.16
Source: Fortmann-Roe, Scott, Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoff, htt
p://scott.fortmann-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
Figure 6.9: The bias vs variance tradeoff in a model
Suppose, after several modeling iterations on the loan
delinquency problem, diﬀerent error rates are calculated on
training and validation data. Out of all the customers in the
training dataset, the model is correctly able to predict 90
percent of customers if they would become delinquent or not.
Then the error rate of the model is 10 percent, which includes
irreducible errors, bias, and variances. After calculating errors
on diﬀerent iterations of the models, eﬀorts should be made to
reduce these errors as described in the following:
–A model with high bias is underﬁtting. That is, the model has
barely learned on the training set to even perform well on
validation and test sets. A good way to address this problem
is by increasing the model complexity, such as by adding
more features.
–A model with high variance is overﬁtting. That is, the model
has tried to capture too much information from the training
set and failed to generalize on new data. A good way to
address this problem is by adding more training data.
Ideally, a model with low bias and low bias is a good model
which should be ﬁnally selected.
Model Improvement
After evaluating the errors, the next step is to improve the
performance of the model further to create a ﬁnal model. Note
that model improvement is also an iterative process and the
modeling process goes through the steps of data collection, data
preparation, modeling and evaluation again and again. There is
no completely right or wrong way to do this, but the following
points should be kept in mind while experimenting with model
improvement:
–Add external data, such as census data or credit scores, to
create new features.
–Add more and more features but at the same time include
features that inﬂuence the target.
–Have training, validation and test sets with sizes suﬃcient to
have statistically signiﬁcant data points to learn training and
validation error rates.
–Use modeling technique suitable for the problem.
–Control for model complexity and generalization by
reducing the number of features.
Step 5—Experimentation
Model evaluation techniques only help to evaluate the
theoretical performance of the model on the validation and test
sets. But theoretical performance does not guarantee the
success of the model in real-world. For example, in the loan
delinquency problem, customers identiﬁed as high likelihood to
miss payment of loan installment would need some action such
as reminder calls in order to prevent them missing their
payment. A campaign can be designed to make preventive calls
to all such customers. In practice, there can be lot of operational
issues (e.g. capacity of call center, script designing and training
to call center agents, IT issues in implementing the new process,
data privacy/ information security especially in case of
outsourced call center, etc.), in executing such a campaign.
Therefore, it is essential to conduct such campaigns on small
scale i.e. on small customer base, learn and address these issues
before implementing such campaigns regularly for all
customers. In addition to this, testing the model on a small base
can also help in observing quantitative beneﬁts from this
exercise and qualitative feedback from customers.
Experiments should be designed in such campaigns in order to
test out diﬀerent hypothesis and quantify the actual impact of
the models and know whether it meets the desired
expectations. There are many diﬀerent ways to design an
experiment, but the following are important general steps:
1.Deﬁne a relevant success metric that meets the business
objective. Examples of such metrics are conversion rate,
customer retention rate, saving costs, or crosssell rate.
2.Divide the population randomly into groups to measure the
performance improvement of the model. One of the ways is
to design an A/ B test with two groups:
a.A test group, on which the output of the model is
tested
b.A control group that does not use model output
3.Execute the experiment and measure the success metric for
the test and control groups
In the loan delinquency problem, an A/ B test can be designed
to measure (a) the impact of then model (do the customers
identiﬁed as having a high likelihood to miss payment actually
end up missing payment) and (b) the impact of preventive
reminder calls to customers using the call center (does call
center calling prevent customers from missing payment).
Following the preceding steps, an experiment can be designed
as follows (see Figure 6.10):
1.The success metric can be deﬁned as the “delinquency rate”:
the percentage of customers who missed out their payment
during the three months of campaign duration
2.Divide the population into test and control groups in equal
proportions with enough samples to measure the
performance between the groups:
a.Test group: The customers identiﬁed by the model as
having a high likelihood to miss payment.
Furthermore, divide the test group into two more
groups: Group A, the customers who are called by the
call center, and Group B, the customers who are not
called.
b.Control group: The customers who are randomly
selected or selected using some existing rules (that is,
without applying the model). Similarly, divide the
control groups into two more groups: Group C, the
customers who are called, and Group D, the customers
who are not called.
3.An experiment can be conducted to measure the
delinquency rate success metric over these four groups to
quantify the real impact of the model based on the real
impact of preventive calling. The call center can actively call
customers under Group A and Group C, while customers
under Group B and Group D can be left without calling.
Figure 6.10: The A/B test design
After all the customers are successfully contacted, the
delinquency rate of these groups should be measured over
three months to observe whether the model and preventive
calling helped. Ideally, if the model and preventive calling has a
positive impact, the following should be true:
–The delinquency rate of Group B should be more than that of
Group D. This would mean that the model is correctly able to
identify customers who would miss payment: customers in
Group B (who have a high likelihood to miss payment as per
the model) end up missing payment more than the randomly
selected customers in Group D.
–The delinquency rate of Group A should be less than that of
Group B. This would mean that preventive calling leads to a
lower delinquency rate in the customers identiﬁed by the
model as having a high likelihood to miss payment. This is
because customers in both Group A and Group B are
identiﬁed from the model, but only Group A customers are
called. Similarly, the delinquency rate of Group C should also
be less than that of Group D.
–The delinquency rate of Group A also can be compared with
the delinquency rate of Group C to measure the impact of
the model on the customers who are called. Note that the
impact of preventive calling can have diﬀerent eﬀects on
customers from Group A (high likelihood to miss payment)
and Group C (random customers). For example, preventive
calling can remind customers and eventually reduce the
delinquency rate, or it may have no impact at all as those
customers might have already decided to miss payment.
These measurements can easily help quantify the success of the
model and success of preventive calling. Additionally, these
impacts also can be estimated in terms of dollar value to
quantify the business impact. Once the success of the model
and preventive calling is established from this experiment,
bank management can implement such campaigns regularly.
This can be done by preparing such list of customers with high
likelihood to miss payment and conduct preventive calling
every month.
Big Data Technology Stack
This section describes the big data technology stack, which
forms a backbone for any data science project. As deﬁned in the
data science lifecycle (refer to Figure 6.3), diﬀerent tools are
needed for collecting the data, preparing and manipulating the
data, building machine learning models and evaluating the
performance of these models.
Figure 6.11 describes popular tools used for data ingestion
and data storage (under data collection) and data preparation,
modeling and evaluation (under data processing). Note that
only open source software option licensed under Apache
Software Foundation are described here because they are
widely used across the industry and have good open source
community support. But generally, companies use open source
or commercial tools based on their needs.
Figure 6.11: The big data technology stack
Data Collection Toolkit
As explained in the preceding section, data collection involves
ingesting data in diﬀerent formats and from diﬀerent sources.
Depending on the volume, velocity, variety and veracity of data,
diﬀerent tools can be used. For example, a number of tweets
about one topic on Twitter could be in the range of a few
thousand per second, whereas the number of transactions on a
stock exchange can be in the range of few hundred thousand
per second or even more. Depending on the high volume and
velocity of data from a stock, diﬀerent tools may be required for
ingesting and storing the data.
Broadly, data collection involves these two steps, data ingestion
and data storage:
–Data ingestion: Data ingestion involves ingesting or
importing the data from diﬀerent sources. The ingestion can
happen in batches or real time:
Batches: When data is ingested in batches, it is
imported in discrete chunks at periodic intervals of
time. The batch can run daily, weekly, or monthly
depending on the requirement (for example, sales
reporting or financial consolidation). The advantage of
batch processing is that it allows for some high level
of transformation on the data before storing.
Real time: When data is ingested in real time, it is
imported from the source with a short execution time,
providing near-instantaneous output. Real-time
ingestion does not allow complex data
transformation; therefore, it is mainly used in
processes where data is needed quickly for real-time
actions or decisions. Some examples where real-time
ingestion is required include high-frequency trading,
sentiment analysis on social media, and IoT (internet
of things) data capture.
Data Ingestion Tools
There are many open source tools available for ingesting the data in real-time and
batches. Some of these tools are the following:
Apache Kafka is a streaming platform used for handling real-time data feeds.
Apache Flume is used for efficiently collecting, aggregating, and moving bulk
streaming data.
Apache Sqoop is used for efficiently transferring data from a relational database to
Hadoop HDFS.
(HDFS is a popular data storage system used by Hadoop architecture. It is just a type
of distributed file system, or a system that stores a copy of files stored across multiple
computers.) Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apac
he.org
In cases where only data transfer is needed, then FTP can be used. The transfer can be
from the data source to the landing zone (temporary storage location) or from landing
zone to a database, data warehouse or data lake (permanent storage location).
FTP (file transfer protocol) is a network protocol used to transfer files between a client
and a server. It enables easy data transfer across the network. For more secure file
access, transfer and management, SFTP (SSH file transfer protocol) is used.
Source: The TCP/IP Guide. [Online]. Available: http://tcpipguide.com/
–Data storage: Data storage involves storing all the data in a
single storage place, which provides robustness, security,
and ﬂexibility. There are many data storage solutions over
the cloud and on-premises that can be used according to
need. Two popular ones are data warehouses and data lakes:
A data warehouse is a centralized repository that
stores data from multiple sources and transforms it
into a standard format for efficient storage, querying
and analysis. In data warehouses, data is stored in
RDBMSs (relational database management systems)
in the form of tables, in which the table
structure/schema is predefined. This ensures that the
data organization is subject to database rules to
ensure accuracy, credibility, and integrity. Due to the
data warehouses rules, bad quality data is either
rejected or treated according to special rules.
A data lake is a system that gives flexibility to store
data in any format (relational, non-relational, and so
on). The principle of data lake is “Store first, process
later,” or have single storage for all of the data that
anyone in an organization might need to analyze.
Data is kept in its raw form and transformed only
when it is ready to be used. In contrast to a data
warehouse, a data lake does not need a data table
structure/schema before storage. These applications
make data lakes an ideal choice to store all data of a
company as it does not require any business
specification before storage and saves a lot of time
and effort.
Data Lakes with Apache Hadoop HDFS
Data lakes are commonly constructed with the Hadoop architecture because Hadoop
provides a collection of open source software libraries that can efficiently store and
process big datasets. Some advantages of using HDFS:
–HDFS is better than traditional distributed file systems as it is highly fault-tolerant.
It can prevent data loss in case of system failure as a copy of files is stored across
multiple computers.
–It can store massive datasets with easy access.
–It can break down data into separate pieces and do parallel processing.
–It has a low cost compared to a traditional data storage system.
Source: Apache Hadoop. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
Data Processing Toolkit
After storing the data, the next step is to process and transform
it into a useable form for modeling. The toolkit described in this
section covers tools usually used for data preparation, modeling
and evaluation. Often data is collected from various sources, so
it is untidy. That is, it has inconsistent data types, useful
columns spread across multiple ﬁles, and other unstructured
characteristics. Data processing ensures that this data is
organized so that is easy to retrieve whenever needed. This step
is also called data transformation as it involves steps such as
