C H A P T ER 9
Communicating Data 
Analysis Results
Chapter Preview
The last step in the data analysis process is to explain the results of our analyses and their 
­implications. Whether the goal is to inform or persuade, effectively communicating results is 
critical. If the intended audience does not understand the information, then it does not matter 
how well the analysis was performed.
	
Data analysis results can be communicated through memos, reports, or oral presentations, 
to name a few methods. Regardless of the form of communication, analyses must be supported 
using data visualizations, data stories, or interactive data visualizations. This chapter focuses 
on best practices for the common forms of data analysis communication you will encounter in 
your accounting career, including preparing effective data visualizations (both static and inter-
active) and creating data stories.
Report
Stage 3
Report
Stage 3
Communicate
I
C
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
Interpret
Analyze
Stage 2
Analysis
M
O
S
A
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
1. Prepare data
2. Build information
    models
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Plan
Stage 1
Strategy
Objective
Motivation
9-0

Professional Insight: Can Data Visualization Knowledge 
Distinguish You From the Crowd?
Jenna is a senior accounting student who recently finished an audit internship with a large 
international accounting firm.
One of my biggest takeaways was how much high-quality communication was 
valued by my internship firm. This was especially true when it came to communicat-
ing the results of data analyses.
I was the only intern on the audit client that had experience using data visualiza-
tion software. I was able to create data visualizations for a presentation that the 
team prepared for the client. As a result, I was invited to attend the presentation. 
Being involved in the client meeting allowed me to interact with the partner on the 
audit. I believe it really helped me stand out from the other interns and is one of 
the reasons I was offered a full-time position.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 9.1   Explain how a data 
story communicates data anal-
ysis results.
•	 Develop Data Literacy
•	 Communicate Effectively
•	 Tell a Data Story
Communicate Accounting 
Information
(Example: Financial 
Accounting) 
 LO 9.2   Summarize the steps 
for creating effective data 
visualizations.
•	 Verify the Data
•	 Consider the Audience
•	 Define the Objective
Match Objectives to 
Visualization Types
(Example: Auditing) 
 LO 9.3   Describe the charac-
teristics of an effective data 
visualization.
•	 Use Principles of Visual Perception
•	 Consider Preattentive Attributes
•	 Avoid Clutter
•	 Use Visualization-Specific Best Practices
Evaluate Visualizations
(Example: Managerial 
Accounting) 
 LO 9.4   Recognize misleading 
data visualizations.
•	 Omitting the Baseline
•	 Manipulating the Y-axis
•	 Going Against Conventions
•	 Selectively Choosing the Data
•	 Using the Wrong Graph
Identify Misleading Data 
Visualizations
(Example: Managerial 
Accounting) 
 LO 9.5   Create an interactive 
data visualization presentation.
•	 Best Practices for Live Presentations
•	 Creating Interactive Data Visualizations
Create an Interactive 
Visualization
(Example: Financial 
Accounting) 
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
Chapter Roadmap  9-1

9-2  CHAPTER 9  Communicating Data Analysis Results
Finding valuable insights in data and then communicating them effectively is, in the words of 
Google’s Chief Economist Hal Varian, a “hugely important skill.”1 This is particularly important 
for accountants who frequently communicate data analysis findings to a variety of stakeholders. 
Develop Data Literacy
Effectively communicating these findings requires data literacy, which is the ability to under-
stand and communicate data. Why is data literacy so important? A study by the data visualization 
software company Qlik and the consulting firm Accenture found that 63% of employees use data 
to a make a decision at least once a week.2 Further, another study by the consulting firm McKinsey 
& Company found that companies where employees consistently use data in ­decision-making 
were more likely to report revenue growth of more than 10% in the past three years.3
Data Let’s use an example to illustrate data literacy. Imagine you are an accountant for 
Huskie Motor Corporation (HMC).4 HMC is an international automobile manufacturer that 
produces and sells cars in 15 countries. The countries are grouped into three regions–Europe, 
North America, and South America (Illustration 9.1).
9.1  How Do We Tell a Data Story?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Explain how a data story communicates data analysis results.
1McKinsey & Company, 2009. Hal Varian on how the Web challenges managers. https://www.mckinsey.com/
industries/technology-media-and-telecommunications/our-insights/hal-varian-on-how-the-web-challenges-
managers (accessed July 2022). 
2Qlik and Accenture. 2020. The human impact of data literacy. Data Literacy Project. https:// 
thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact (accessed July 2022). 
4Ann C. Dzuranin, Johan Perols and Dana L. Hart, “Huskie Motor Corporation: Visualizing the Present and 
Predicting the Future,” IMA Educational Case Journal, Volume 11 Issue 2, 2018, bit.ly/3qHsGS2. ©2022, 
Institute of Management Accountants, www.imanet.org. Used with permission.
3QuantamBlack AI by McKinsey, 2019. Catch them if you can: how leaders in data and analytics have pulled 
ahead. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/quantumblack/our-insights/catch-them-if-you-can-
how-leaders-in-data-and-analytics-have-pulled-ahead (accessed July 2022).
ILLUSTRATION 9.1  Huskie 
Motor Corporation (HMC) 
International Operations
Europe
North America
South America
France
Canada
Argentina
Germany
Mexico
Bolivia
Poland
USA
Brazil
Spain
Chile
Sweden
Colombia
United Kingdom
Venezuela
ILLUSTRATION 9.2  HMC Brands 
and Models
Brands
Apechete
Jackson
Tatra
Models
Chare
Brutus
Advantage
Island
Crux
Bloom
Pebble
Fiddle
Jespie
Robin
Rebel
Mortimer
Summet
Wood
Rambler
HMC has three brands of vehicles, and each brand has five unique models (Illustration 9.2).

9.1  How Do We Tell a Data Story?  9-3
You have been asked to prepare an analysis of sales trends by month for each brand. 
Illustration 9.3 provides sales information by brand for each month, but does it show what 
you need to understand about sales trends?
ILLUSTRATION 9.3  HMC Gross 
Sales by Brand
$ 2.4M
$ 4.3M
$ 6.5M
$ 0.2M
$ 1.2M
$ 2.2M
$ 3.4M
$ 0.2M
$ 2.5M
$ 1.2M
$ 4.6M
$ 2.3M
$ 2.3M
$ 1.2M
$ 2.4M
$ 1.2M
$ 2.4M
$ 1.2M
$ 2.6M
$ 1.7M
$ 2.7M
$ 1.6M
$ 2.2M
$ 1.4M
$ 2.5M
$ 2.8M
$ 3.7M
$ 1.3M
$ 2.0M
$ 2.9M
$ 3.2M
$ 3.7M
$ 3.5M
$ 3.2M
$ 2.9M
$ 1.9M
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Apechete
Gross Sales Trends by Brand:
2024–2025 (in $ Millions)
Jackson Tatra
Analyzing this table determines which months had the highest sales and which had the 
lowest. Preparing a line chart would accomplish the same thing (Illustration 9.4).
ILLUSTRATION 9.4  HMC Gross 
Sales Trends Line Chart
$3.0M
$3.5M
$4.0M
$4.5M
$5.0M
$5.5M
$6.0M
$6.5M
$7.0M
$2.0M
$2.5M
$1.0M
$1.5M
$0.0M
$0.5M
Gross Sales
Month
Gross Sales by Brand: 2024–2025 ($ Millions)
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Brand
Apechete
Jackson
Tatra
The chart in Illustration 9.4 more clearly shows the sales trends:
•	March is the highest selling month, and April is the lowest selling month.
•	Sales peak again in June for the Apechete and Jackson brands, then level off for the 
remainder of the year.
•	The Tatra brand has increasing sales from April to August.
While the figures in Illustration 9.3 can be used to determine the sales trends, it is easier to 
do so with Illustration 9.4. Because data literacy skills are necessary for a successful account-
ing career, this chapter examines the data literacy skill of communicating data ­analysis results.

9-4  CHAPTER 9  Communicating Data Analysis Results
Communicate Effectively
The final step in the data analysis process is summarizing the project’s findings and commu-
nicating them to the intended audience. This requires explaining the meaning of the data by 
writing memos or reports or preparing presentations that explain the data analysis results 
clearly and concisely. This is not easy, and it takes practice. Effectively reporting the results 
of data analysis requires being aware of the audience, focusing on the message, putting that 
message in context, and making sure it is clearly presented as an engaging story. 
Understand the Audience
Have you ever attended a presentation where the presenter didn’t provide enough background 
information for you to understand the topic? It is like walking into an advanced physics class 
when you have never taken a physics course. Understanding to whom we are communicating 
is critical. The audience (or reader) must be provided with enough background and explana-
tion to follow the presentation.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 9.1: Identify the Audience
When communicating data analysis results, identifying the stakeholders of the analysis is an 
important first step. They are the audience to whom you are communicating (Stakeholders):
•	 Internal stakeholders will likely have some knowledge of what you are communicating.
•	 When communicating to external stakeholders, consider what information they will find most 
relevant and focus on that.
Knowing if the audience is comprised of internal or external stakeholders makes it possible to 
develop communication that is both relevant and understandable. In the HMC example, if the 
communication is for internal stakeholders such as company management, it is safe to assume 
they will have knowledge of the company’s background. Whereas, if the presentation was for 
external stakeholders such as investors, it should include more background information about 
the company.
Focus on the Message
Accountants are comfortable reading and interpreting numbers, so it is easy to focus solely on 
the numbers when communicating data analyses. However, an audience is likely more inter-
ested in the relationship between the numbers and the message. For example, if the objective 
of the analysis is to identify expense trends, ensure the communication explains the trends 
and does not only focus on the amounts.
Put it in Context
The third suggestion for communicating effectively is to put the data in context, or ­perspective. 
There are two aspects to context when communicating data analyses results:
	 1.	 The context of the overall purpose of the analysis. Is the purpose to inform or persuade 
the audience?
	 2.	 The context of the individual analyses. Are the analyses based on all the company data or 
just one department? Are the figures in whole dollars or in millions?
When communicating data analysis results, give the audience the information they need to under-
stand the context of the analysis. We will discuss other aspects of context throughout this chapter.
Strive for Clarity
The fourth suggestion for effective data analysis communication is to make sure the commu-
nication is easy to understand. Do this by clearly explaining the data and the results in the 

9.1  How Do We Tell a Data Story?  9-5
narrative of the communication and including effective visualizations. The last suggestion for 
effective communication is to engage the audience with a memorable story.
Tell a Data Story
People have communicated knowledge and information using stories for thousands of years–
they are an integral part of human communication. In fact, the human mind is wired to absorb 
stories. Research has shown that when we hear or read a story our brains are activated. The 
emotional part of the brain releases chemicals to stimulate feelings of connection, reward, and 
recognition.5 In other words, a story creates both a physical and emotional response. Research 
has also shown that facts are up to 22% more memorable when they are part of a story.6 So, 
how can storytelling help communicate the results of data analysis?
Data Story Elements
There are three elements to a data story–data, narrative, and visuals (Illustration 9.5).
5Psychology Today, 2011. Rutledge, P. The psychological power of storytelling. https://www.psychologytoday.
com/us/blog/positively-media/201101/the-psychological-power-storytelling (accessed July 2022).
6Forbes, 2015. Harrison, K. A good presentation is about data and story. https://www.forbes.com/sites/­
kateharrison/2015/01/20/a-good-presentation-is-about-data-and-story/#1f9a2f54450f (accessed July 2022). 
8Thermopylae Sciences and Technology, 2014. Humans process visual data better. https://www.t-sciences.
com/news/humans-process-visual-data-better (accessed July 2022). 
ILLUSTRATION 9.5  Elements of 
Effective Storytelling
Data
Narrative
Narrative
Visuals
Visuals
Data
Narrative
Data
Data
Explain
Enlighten
Visuals
Narrative
Visuals
Engage
The author of Effective Data Storytelling, Brent Dykes, describes how these elements 
combine to explain, enlighten, and engage the audience:7
•	The intersection of data and narrative explains the data story. The story’s narrative pro-
vides the context and commentary needed to understand the results of the analysis. It 
provides structure to the data and guides the reader through the meaning of the analysis.
•	Data also intersects with visuals to enlighten the reader with insights. Visualizing the 
data reveals patterns or trends that may have gone unnoticed without the help of visual-
izations. In fact, humans process visual images 60,000 times faster than text.8
•	Finally, combining narrative with visuals engages the audience in the story. A good story 
can hold the attention of the reader and increases the likelihood of action.
In addition to including these three elements, a good data story must be structured effectively.
Data Story Structure
Most stories have a similar structure. They introduce the characters and set the scene, then a 
series of events build to the most climatic or important point of the story. Following the climax 
of the story, the rest of the events unravel until conflicts are resolved and the story concludes.
7Dykes, B. (2020). Effective Storytelling: How to Drive Change with Data, Narrative, and Visuals. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley. 

9-6  CHAPTER 9  Communicating Data Analysis Results
Following the storytelling arc described in Illustration 9.7 is a simple and effective way 
