changing the data types, ﬁltering, aggregating, joining or
concatenating diﬀerent datasets. The transformed datasets can
then be used to generate some meaningful insights or business
intelligence reports.
Traditionally, companies have followed an ETL (extract,
transform and load) approach, which involves performing such
transformations before loading data into the database. But
many times, the entire transformation process can be
cumbersome and signiﬁcantly reduce the volume of the data
that can be stored. With the availability of cheap and scalable
data storage, such as data lakes, companies are gradually
moving from ETL to an ELT (extract, load and transform) model
where transformation can happen after storing the data. The
advantage is that all the data can be stored ﬁrst and
transformed later according to need. However, in practice,
companies are neither completely ETL (as they need to store
more and more data) nor completely ELT (as storing entire raw
data may consume a lot of disk space which can be unnecessary
and add to the cost).
Data Processing Tools
Some of the data processing tools described here can be used for data preparation,
building machine learning models and even perform model evaluations. Data
processing for small datasets can be handled by commonly used spreadsheet tools,
but processing of bigger datasets requires tools like R, Python, SQL, Hive, Impala, and
Pig. The following are some of the commonly used data processing tools: R and
Python are open-source programming languages widely used in data science for data
processing and modeling.
SQL is a programming language widely used for querying and managing data in
relational databases. Hadoop MapReduce is a programming model in Hadoop used
for parallel processing of large datasets in a distributed manner.
Apache Hive is a data warehouse built on Hadoop for data processing,
summarization, querying, and analysis using a SQL-like language called Hive QL (HQL).
Pig is a high-level scripting language for performing data analysis on top of Hadoop.
Impala is another query engine built on top of Hadoop in which querying is faster
than Hive.
Apache Spark is a processing framework similar to but much faster than MapReduce.
It supports various tools for different purposes, such as Spark SQL for structured
datasets, Spark Streaming for data streaming, MLlib for machine learning, and Apache
Storm for real-time computation.
Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
Data Workflow Toolkit
Given the standard steps of data ingestion, data transfer, data
storage and data processing, there are two ways these processes
can be operationalized: either by manually executing these
steps, or using data workﬂows that can carry out these
processes automatically or semi-automatically. It is diﬃcult to
manually perform all of these tasks eﬃciently, accurately and
quickly every time new data is received. Therefore, data
workﬂows/pipelines are created to automate these processes.
Workflow Tools
Some of the popular open source data workflow tools include the following:
Apache Oozie is used to automate the entire data ingestion, transfer, storage, and
processing process and schedule these processes as jobs. Apache Oozie is quite useful
as it can fully integrate with the Apache Hadoop and supports Hadoop jobs for Apache
MapReduce, Pig, Hive, and Sqoop. In addition to that, complex data transformations
that need complex scheduling can be managed by creating sub-workflows.
Apache Airflow is another open source tool managing complex computational
workflows and data processing pipelines. Overall, Airflow supports connectors to most
of the cloud service providers, and it has a better UI, which can help you visualize your
pipeline’s dependencies and see how they progress.
Source: Apache Software Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.apache.org
In addition to the open source solutions for the big data
technology stack, there is a mix of good commercial cloud
platform solutions (standalone or built on top of these open
source frameworks) oﬀered by leading companies. A few such
solutions are AWS (Amazon Web Services), Microsoft Azure,
and Google Cloud Platform. The advantages of using these
commercial solutions is that they can provide on-demand cloud
computing solutions with software, databases, computing
power and services on a paid subscription basis.
Challenges and Lessons from Data Science Projects
Data science is a rapidly evolving ﬁeld with continuous
research and development of new algorithms, big data and
analytics tools, and products using machine learning. Yet, many
organizations have started adopting data science only quite
recently. Due to this limited experience, there are several
challenges that companies face when they start working on
data science. These challenges can be unique to the company,
team, project or even the model, but broadly, most of the
challenges are similar across the industry (based on the
maturity of the data science practice). The following are the
typical challenges faced while working on data science projects:
–Data platform (legacy systems): Many companies that are
new to data science (but have been in existence for several
decades) have legacy systems. It is diﬃcult to connect these
legacy systems seamlessly to data lakes, for example. It is
complex to implement a new algorithm and way to feed data
back to the legacy system for operations teams that need to
use them in decision making.
–Data quality and data dictionaries: In most companies, raw
data is dirty (missing, inaccurate, duplicate, misleading, and
non-integrated), and data dictionaries are incomplete or
absent. This poses a signiﬁcant challenge to data scientists’
productivity as they need to spend a lot of time in
understanding the data and perform a lot of quality checks.
And many times incorrect data can lead to erroneous
results.
–Data privacy and lack of data access: In many projects, data
is not available, or not available on time, due to data privacy
issues. To resolve these issues, an upfront assessment of data
privacy should be done at the scoping phase itself, and
appropriate measures should be taken to address the issues.
In some cases, a project may have to discontinue due to
unresolved issues.
–Ethical Issues: Many times, data science projects involve
working with sensitive data such as race, gender, religion,
national origin, and medical history, and we should be
careful to use only data that is allowed by rules and
regulations. Some of the variables, even though allowed by
the regulations, might introduce discrimination (or
marginalize certain sections of the society). Organizations
must take extra care to ensure that algorithms do not create
discrimination and are used in ethical ways.
–Lack of project sponsorships: Many companies do not focus
on investing appropriately in data science projects. This is
due to a couple reasons:
First, data science projects usually have a high setup
cost (cost of resources and big data tools). Also,
management often does not fully understand the
potential benefits of data science project.
Second, management usually underestimates the
complexity associated with implementing a successful
experiment in business operations. A lot of projects
fail when implemented at scale in an organization
even after success during experimentation. This is due
to challenges associated with integrating data science
models with legacy systems, and due to the
complexity associated with change management, as
business processes need to be updated and teams
have to accept new ways of working.
–Expectation management: It is diﬃcult to manage
expectations about the impact of data science projects with
management. It can only provide you a limited boost in
business or reduce ineﬃciencies. Remember that data
science is not magic! The beneﬁt of a data science project
also may not immediately quantiﬁable when used to develop
a data-driven approach for business, automatic processing,
data-driven decision making for business transformation
and change management, training existing employees with
data science skills, and so forth, but can eliminate future
problems and help create a data-driven culture. This should
also be explained to management to set the right
expectations.
–Focus on wrong problems: The lack of clear direction,
unclear problem statements, and unclear execution plans
can cause data science projects to fail. For example—
building a cool product without any business utility is likely
to fail, as in cases when the product or model was created by
data geeks without involving business teams.
Conclusion
The ﬁeld of data science and big data is very broad. The aim of
this chapter was to provide a high-level overview of the data
science and big data analytics ﬁeld and explain some key
concepts. To master this ﬁeld and develop proﬁciency to apply
these learnings in the real world, one must go through further
readings and practice on real-world problems (under the
supervision of an experienced data scientist) or on open data
science competitions. Moreover, the ﬁeld is rapidly evolving
and therefore continuous learning is required to keep up to
date about the developments.
In order to gain further knowledge about this subject, the
following are some good resources:
–An Introduction to Statistical Learning with Applications in R
by Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie and Robert
Tibshirani
–Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective by Kevin
Murphy
–Machine Learning with R by Brett Lantz
–Doing Data Science by Cathy O’Neil, Rachel Schutt
–Deep Learning by Aaron Courville, Ian Goodfellow, and
Yoshua Bengio
–Mining of Massive Datasets by Jure Leskovec, Anand
Rajaraman, Jeﬀ Ullman
–Coursera online course: Machine Learning by Andrew Ng
Endnotes
1 Data source: Google Trends (https://www.google.com/trends).
2 Ng, Andrew (2018) Machine Learning Yearning—Technical Strategy for AI
Engineers in the Era of Deep Learning, Unpublished book, www.mlyearning.org
3 Linden, Greg, Smith, Brent, York, Jeremy (2003) Amazon.com “Recommendations:
Item-to-Item Collaborative Filtering, IEEE Internet Computing,” v. 7, n. 1, pp. 76–80,
January 2003. doi>10.1109/MIC.2003.1167344
4 Gomez-Uribe, Carlos A. and Hunt, Neil (2016) “The Netﬂix Recommender System:
Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation, ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems (TMIS),” v. 6, n. 4, pp. 1–19, January 2016.
5 Khandani, A. E., Kim, A. J., and Lo, A. W. (2010) “Consumer credit-risk models via
machine learning algorithms.” Journal of Banking & Finance, v 34, pp. 2767–2787.
6 Tukey, John W. (1962) “The Future of Data Analysis.” Ann. Math. Statist. v. 33, n. 1,
pp. 1–67. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177704711
7 Cleveland, William S. (2001) “Data Science: an action plan for expanding the
technical areas of the ﬁeld of statistics.” International Statistical Review, v. 69, n. 1, pp.
21–26.
8 Davenport, Thomas & J Patil, D. (2012) “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st
Century.” Harvard Business Review. v. 90, pp. 70–76, 128.
9 Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J. et al. (2011) Big data: The next frontier
for innovation, competition, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute working
paper. www.mckinsey.com
1 0 Jacobson, Ralph (2013) “2.5 quintillion bytes of data created every day. How does
CPG & Retail manage it?” (IBM, April 24, 2013) [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.co
m/blogs/insights-on-business/consumer-products/2-5-quintillion-bytes-of-datacreated-
every-day-how-does-cpg-retail-manage-it/
1 1 IBM Corporation (2016), “The Four V’s of Big Data,” 2016. [Online]. Available: htt
p://www.ibmbigdatahub.com/infographic/four-vs-bigdata
1 2 Pipino, L.L., Lee, Y.W., and Wang, R.Y. (2002) “Data quality assessment.”
Communications of the ACM, v. 45, n. 4, pp. 211–218.
1 3 Ng, Machine Learning Yearning, op.cit.
1 4 Fortmann-Roe, Scott Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoﬀ http://scott.fortma
nn-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
1 5 Ibid.
1 6 James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. (2013) An Introduction to Statistical
Learning with Applications in R, 2013, Springer Science and Business Media, New
York.
We would like to thank AXA for providing an intellectual
environment where we could devote time to write this chapter
and receive feedback and guidance from colleagues. This
chapter is written to provide a high-level introduction and
motivation to readers on data science and big data. Most of
what we discuss here has already been said in many books,
research papers, blog posts, mailing lists, and so on. The further
reading suggestions and references at the end of the chapter
are great sources if you want to learn any speciﬁc area in more
depth.
Ankur Agrawal is a seasoned actuarial, analytics professional
heading AXA Data and Tech Innovation Asia lab. Objective of the
lab is to drive AXA towards a tech-led company by leveraging
data and emerging technologies at scale which have the potential
to disrupt the current insurance business model and provide
opportunities to shape future businesses. In his last role with AXA
Business Services in India, he was a member of Exec team
responsible for managing a team of over 200+ professionals
supporting 20+ AXA entities across life, health and P&C actuarial,
data science, and research areas spanning North America,
Europe and Asia region. Prior to that, he has held various
leadership positions in actuarial areas in direct companies as
well as consulting ﬁrms across life, health and P&C actuarial,
operational areas spanning North America, Europe and Asia
region. Ankur is a qualiﬁed actuary from Institute and Faculty of
Actuaries UK and Institute of Actuaries of India and also holds a
Bachelor of Technology, Mechanical from Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi.
Siddhant Tiwari is a data science professional working as a
senior data scientist at AXA Data and Tech Innovation Asia lab.
His role at lab involves executing high-impact data science
projects for AXA entities and supporting them in their data
transformation journey. He is experienced in leading data science
projects involving opportunity assessments, customer
acquisitions, cross-selling and up-selling, product
recommendations, customer retention, risk management and
fraud. Previously, at ZS Associates, he consulted various Fortune
500 pharmaceutical clients in devising sales and marketing
strategies to improve brand positioning in the market using data
analytics. He holds a BE Hons. in Electrical and Electronics from
BITS Pilani, India and MSc. in Business Analytics from National
University of Singapore.
OceanofPDF .com