optimally , they might buy a major stake to have a greater say in operations. Private equity is one such
type of investor . Private equity firms tend to invest in businesses that have unrealized potential but are
struggling financially , possibly because of high debt; make them grow rapidly; and—if (as predicted) the
business does have unrealized potential—reap the benefits.
Hence, it is important for the business, lenders, and investors to accurately identify whether a business
does have the potential to grow or whether the trajectory of financial distress is likely to continue. An
entire area in finance is devoted to understanding and predicting what variables can be used to predict
whether a business is going to experience financial distress or , in extreme cases, go bankrupt.
10.5 FORECASTING FINANCIAL HEALTH
Several predictors have been considered that can help predict creditworthiness. Let’ s understand this
using an example from the perspective of a lender such as a bank. When a business approaches a
bank asking for a loan, the bank is likely to utilize several criteria to first determine the financial health of
the business and then decide whether or not to give a loan. Let’ s assume that a bank wants to
determine variables that can help it assess the financial health of the business. Let’ s also assume that
the bank is being conservative in its estimate and defines creditworthiness in terms of future financial
distress or possibility of bankruptcy . It can focus on financial as well as nonfinancial predictors, but many
times lenders prefer to look at financial predictors to understand the financial health of a business.
10.5.1 Financial Ratios
Businesses report several financial ratios that help lenders evaluate their financial health, such as debt ‒
equity ratio, current ratio, earnings ratio, and operating ratio. These ratios are commonly available on
the balance sheet of a business’ s financial statements. Please see the detailed definitions of these
ratios in the glossary provided in Section 10.9  of this chapter .
For any type of forecasting, businesses tend to use a process of variable selection  to sort the relevant
from the irrelevant variables. If a business knows which variables are relevant, it can use only those
variables in its forecasting models. Another reason for variable selection is to improve the accuracy of
predictions; better predictions result in less costly mistakes. Similarly , when predicting financial health, it
is important to perform variable selection to find the relevant predictors to use in prediction models.
Moreover , many financial predictors tend to be correlated, some of them quite highly; this causes some
predictors to appear significant when they are not—that is, the presence of collinear predictors results in
incorrect predictions. Let’ s understand what multicollinearity is.
10.6 MULTICOLLINEARITY
Collinearity occurs when two predictor variables are highly correlated. Multicollinearity occurs when
several such variables are present in the dataset. Multicollinearity can occur for a variety of reasons in
business data, such as when predictors are dependent on the same underlying cause or when data
collection is observational. In our case, since financial ratios are based on financial indicators, the
likelihood of multicollinearity is high. Multicollinearity causes the following issues. First, when
multicollinearity exists in a regression model, it may not be appropriate to use ordinary least squares
(OLS) regression. This is because OLS assumes that the predictor variables are independent—that is,
uncorrelated (in fact, predictor variables are called independent variables  for this reason). The presence
of multicollinearity makes it dif ficult to interpret the coef ficient estimates of individual predictors. Recall
from Chapter 2  in which we discussed linear regression that we used beta coef ficients to determine
whether a predictor variable had a significant influence on the outcome variable. If several of the
predictors are highly correlated, the influence of a specific predictor on the outcome (e.g., significance
level) will change depending on which predictors are included in the regression model, resulting in
incorrect assessments from the analysis. Second, one of the assumptions of OLS is that we examine
the change in the outcome variable for a unit change in the predictor , holding all other predictors
constant. However , if two predictors are highly correlated, such an assumption would not be fulfilled.
Moreover , if our aim is to find which predictors are the most versus least influential, multicollinearity will
make the task dif ficult. Third, as the correlation among predictors increases, standard errors also
increase because it becomes dif ficult to determine whether the variation in the outcome is caused
because of predictor 1 or predictor 2. Therefore, the standard error of both predictors increases. High
incidents of standard error make it dif ficult to reject the null hypothesis even though the null may be
false. Therefore, the likelihood of Type I error increases (i.e., the inability to reject a false null
hypothesis). Finally , multicollinearity can result in an overfitted model because of the inclusion of two
predictors that are very similar in the way they relate to the output. An overfit model would be quite
inaccurate and poorly generalizable while making predictions on a new dataset. This occurs because
the model has learned spurious relations given the multicollinearity present in the original dataset that
may not be present in the new dataset on which the model is asked to predict. A bit needs to said about
the bias ‒ variance trade-of f to understand the problem caused by overfit models (please refer to the
Technical Appendix for a detailed discussion of the bias–variance trade-of f). When we have an overfit
model, the bias of the model is low because it fits the training data really well; however , the variance of
the model is high because it doesn’t predict well on the new data.
10.6.1 Testing for Multicollinearity
Given the possibility of multicollinearity occurring when using financial variables to determine the
financial health of a business, we need a method that can address multicollinearity as well as help in the
selection of variables. The first step is to have a method to detect whether a dataset has multicollinear
predictors. The simplest way to test for multicollinearity is by looking at the scatterplot between dif ferent
predictor variables. A linear relationship between any two predictors indicates a high degree of
correlation between them. Similarly , a correlation matrix between all the predictors would quantify the
level of correlation among the predictors. Large changes in beta coef ficient estimate values depending
on when one or the other predictor is or is not included in the regression could be another indication of
multicollinearity . For instance, if earnings ratio had a high coef ficient estimate value when current ratio
was not included but the coef ficient value was reduced significantly in magnitude when current ratio was
included in the regression, this would indicate a high correlation between earnings ratio and current
ratio.
Finally , the variance inflation factor (VIF)  is used to quantify the level of multicollinearity . VIF is a metric
that helps in determining inflated variance of the beta coef ficient for a specific predictor variable because
of multicollinearity with other predictor variables. Stated dif ferently , VIF tells us how much the variance
(the spread of predictor values) is inflated due to these correlations. Since VIFs capture the relationship
among predictor variables, the VIF is calculated by regressing each predictor against every other
predictor . Such a regression will provide an R2 value, which is then put into the following equation for
the ith predictor:
1/(1−R2
i)
As you may recall, R2 is the coef ficient of determination in an OLS regression model that informs us
how well the predictor(s) is(are) able to predict the outcome variable. In this case, R2 indicates how well
other predictors are able to predict the ith predictor .
Hence, we can calculate the value of VIF for each predictor variable. There are some cutof fs that help
us evaluate whether the correlation between the predictors is very high. For instance, a VIF of 1.7 for a
predictor indicates that the variance of that predictor ’s estimate is 1.7 times what it would have been in
the absence of multicollinearity . A VIF of 3.5 indicates 3.5 times more variation. A simple rule of thumb is
that VIF values of more than 5 indicate high multicollinearity .
One way to address multicollinearity is through the use of stepwise regression. However , this can get
computationally inef ficient. Hence, in this chapter we discuss the use of penalized regression, which
provides an ef ficient way to handle multicollinearity through variable selection.
10.7 USING PENALIZED REGRESSION FOR EVALUATING
FINANCIAL HEALTH
One type of regression that can address issues of multicollinearity is called penalized regression. It
introduces a penalty that penalizes the model for having too many predictor variables. Either the
predictors may be less relevant, or they may be correlated. Penalized models shrink the beta-coef ficient
estimates of the less relevant predictors so that they can either be removed or have very little impact in
predicting the outcome variable.
The functional/mathematical formulation of penalized regression allows it to work dif ferently than OLS
regression. For example, we use a set of predictor variables in the OLS model to predict an outcome.
We then compare the predicted value to the actual value (ground truth) to examine the quality of the
OLS model’ s predictions. If the dif ference is high, the quality is poor; if the dif ference is low , the quality is
good. Therefore, we try to minimize the dif ference between the actual and predicted values. As
explained earlier , one issue with multicollinearity is that it results in a model that is overfit; it explains the
training data well, but its predictions on test (i.e., new) data are quite poor .
Penalized regression addresses this situation by adding a shrinkage penalty to the beta-coef ficient
estimates of the predictors. The shrinkage penalty fits a new prediction model that introduces a small
amount of bias but greatly reduces the variance. With the addition of the shrinkage, the output intuitively
becomes less sensitive to changes in the value of the predictor; hence, there is less variance when the
model is used to make predictions on a new dataset. For the purposes of this chapter , we will focus on a
specific type of penalized regression—LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator)1—
which not only helps to address multicollinearity but also allows for variable selection. The other form of
penalized regression is ridge regression, which does not help in variable selection. Specifically , the
penalty term used in the LASSO helps shrink the coef ficient estimates of the less important predictors to
zero. When the beta coef ficients of some predictor variables have been shrunk to zero, they are no
longer included in the prediction model. Hence, this process serves as a variable selection method for
LASSO.
Let’s assume that we have i = 1 to n observations and j = 1 to p predictors and their corresponding beta
coefficients.
Linear regression minimizes the dif ference between the observed outcome values and predicted
outcome values as captured in the following equation:
n
∑
i=1(yi−p
∑
j=1βjxij)2
In LASSO, we add the penalty term
λ|βj|
to the minimization equation of the linear regression. Hence, in LASSO we minimize:
n
∑
i=1(yi−p
∑
j=1βjxij)2
+λp
∑
j=1|βj|
When λ = 0, LASSO converts to OLS. As the value of λ increases, the penalty increases, and the value
of the coef ficient estimates shrinks to zero. That is, λ controls the value of the penalty that is applied to
the regression. The value of λ can vary from 0 to positive infinity .
Another intuitive way to think about the shrinkage penalty is to think of c(β) as the cost applied by
penalized regression on the size of the β coef ficients. β coef ficients determine how much the estimated
outcome values deviate from the observed values (i.e., the deviance between the data and the model).
Adding a penalty on the size of the β coef ficients and forcing them to be near zero improves prediction.
LASSO is especially useful when a model includes several predictor variables and the business is not
able to decide which of these are relevant and which are not. Consider a grocery store with outlets
across several geographic regions. There are many predictors that can af fect the sale of fresh baked
goods, including the presence of local bakeries, the cost of eggs (which could change by region), the
cost of milk, the cost of transportation, the nearness of farms, population density around a specific store,
income level, regionally popular flavors—and the list can keep going. Which of these are the most
important predictors of sales for a specific store? By using LASSO for variable selection, the grocery
store can determine which sales predictors are important and can focus its resources on these relevant
predictors. LASSO can also solve the problem of one form of Big Data—when there are more predictors
than observations. In such an instance, OLS regression will not converge because it needs at least as
many observations as predictors. If the data have two predictors, then the OLS needs at least two
observations or data points to converge (provide a solution). In instances when firms are not sure about
which predictors are most relevant, they may include tens of predictors and would need at least as many
observations for the OLS to work.
Let’s use a specific example to understand how LASSO can help in predicting the financial health of
businesses from the perspective of a lender .
10.7.1 Predicting Financial Health Using LASSO
Let’s consider the example of Altra Bank, a made-up example for the purposes of this chapter that lends
to several businesses and, hence, needs to know the financial health of each so that it can determine
whether the business will be able to pay back the debt amount or whether it is likely to default on its
payments. Having information about the financial health of a business allows Altra Bank to decide
whether to give a loan and how much interest to charge. During its more than 50 years in this business,
Altra Bank has determined that the financial health of a business rarely changes overnight and that any
changes for the worse can be detected through certain predictors. Moreover , Altra Bank has observed
that the financial ratios of a business, as calculated from the balance sheet, are good predictors of
financial health.
In the past, Altra Bank has used these financial ratios to find out which businesses it has lent to need to
