le 6.3 suggests that customers with lower month-end ledger
balances are more likely to miss on payments than other
customers as delinquency rate increases with the decrease in
balance. On the other hand, diﬀerent age buckets do not
indicate any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in delinquency rates.
Table 6.3: Exploratory Data Analysis Using Tables
Month-end Ledger Balance ($) Delinquency Rate
Less than 2500 15%
2500–5000 8%
5000–7500 9%
7500–10000 7%
Greater than 10000 5%
Age Buckets (Years) Delinquency Rate
Under 25 10%
25–50 9.5%
50–75 9%
Over 75 11%
There are several approaches to performing an exploratory
data analysis:
–Tables: Summarize the data in the form of tables (as in Table
6.3) and generate insights.
–Visualization: Visualize these variables (as in Figure 6.6) in
graphical representations like histograms, pie-charts, or bar
charts.
–Correlations: Find correlations of these variables with each
other and with the target variable (in this case it’s
delinquent, Yes or No).
Figure 6.6: Exploratory data analysis
Feature Engineering
After completing an EDA, the next step is to represent raw data
in a format that captures these insights in the form that can be
fed to a machine learning model. Such
transformation/engineering of variables into the formats
suitable for the machine learning model is called feature
engineering, and transformed variables are called features.
Machine learning models take these features as input and learn
from them to predict the output. Feature engineering is one of
the crucial steps to build any machine learning model because
good features improve model performance by producing high-
quality output. In fact, a simple model with good features may
outperform a complex model with bad features. The idea of
feature engineering is to create more features using the data
and present them in a simpler way, which can inﬂuence the
output of your model. Often, feature engineering becomes a
necessity as a machine learning model needs data to be
presented in a certain way that it understands. Some models
are more appropriate for the certain type of features; therefore,
feature engineering involves creating the most appropriate
features given the data, model, and problem.
In the loan delinquency problem, if the selected model only
accepts numerical values, then any feature that is not numeric
would need to be either dropped or transformed into a
numeric. For example, in Table 6.4, a categorical feature
“highest education level” with four categories—Ph.D.,
Bachelors, Masters, and High School—would need to be either
dropped or transformed to a numeric ﬁeld that captures the
essence of these four categories. At the end, when all features
are combined, the resulting feature table would be like Table 6.
4.
Table 6.4: Feature Table
There is no right or wrong way to perform feature engineering,
but Table 6.5 shows some basic techniques which can be used
for structured data (example—tabular data) and unstructured
data (example—text data). Note feature engineering for other
unstructured data such as audios, videos and images are
beyond the scope of this discussion:
Table 6.5: Feature Engineering Techniques
Type of Data Technique Description and Examples*
Quantization/
binningContinuous numerical variables can be quantized
into fixed categories (binary or multiple groups).
For example, “age” can be quantized,
corresponding to different life stages, into 0-25
years, 25-50 years, 50-75 years, and 75 years or
older.
Structured data
(for example,
tabular data)Normalization/
scalingFeatures with drastically different scales can be
appropriately scaled before modeling. For
example, if income ranges from $2,000 to $50,000
and age ranges from 15 years to 100 years, then
income should be appropriately scaled to a
hundredth scale as age or vice versa.
New features New features can be created from existing features
to extract more information. This step should be
done by using inputs of business stakeholders. For
example, monthly income and expenses can be
used to create a new feature “monthly savings” to
identify customers who are not saving enough and
may need a personal loan.
Cleaning text Preprocessing and filtering can eliminate useless
data that adds noise. For example,
–Remove web page tags and attributes and
special characters such as punctuations,
alphanumeric characters, and symbols.
Unstructured
data (for
example,–Convert words to a single case (lower or upper),
remove stop words, frequent words and rare
words, and remove prefixes and suffixes.
text data) Feature
extractionNumerical features are extracted from clean,
processed/ text by using words as keys or features
and different word frequencies as values. Popular
feature extraction techniques include bag-of-words
(BoW) and term frequency-inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF).
*Note: Zheng, A. and Casari, A. (2018) Feature Engineering for Machine Learning,
California: O’Reilly.
Feature Matrix
After creating the features, the next step is to combine all the
engineered features from structured and unstructured data and
target column(s) into one table/matrix called feature matrix. A
feature table from Table 6.4 would transform into a feature
matrix as in Table 6.6 after feature engineering. Observe that a
variable such as gender is converted into columns
“Gender_Male” and “Gender_Female” with binary values (1 or
0); education” is converted as into 4 education level columns;
unstructured text such as “car” is used to create Bag-of-words
features like “BOW_car” and TF-IDF feature like “TF-IDF_car,”
etc. Now, this feature matrix can be easily fed into a machine
learning model.
Table 6.6: Feature Matrix
Note that this is just one illustration. Feature engineering steps
largely depend on the type of problem, data and machine
learning model one intends to use. For example, unsupervised
learning problems do not have a target variable; therefore, the
feature matrix would not have a target column. This is further
described in the next section. Also, not all features in the
feature matrix will be used in the model. Some categorical
features, such as gender and education, which have already
been converted into columns, can be dropped. Depending on
preference, one can choose to merge features diﬀerently, but
creating such a matrix makes it more eﬃcient to experiment
with feature selection in modeling.
Step 4—Modeling
After data collection and data preparation, the next step is to
build the right model for the problem. This section provides a
broad introduction to diﬀerent machine learning algorithms
with emphasis on how to build a model with the problem in
mind. Broadly, machine learning models can be classiﬁed into
two categories, supervised and unsupervised learning:
–Supervised learning involves building models to predict a
target using diﬀerent features. Often supervised machine
learning tasks include building models to estimate future
predictions using historical data, often called predictive
models. Typical predictive model problems include
classiﬁcation and regression:
Classification is a problem in which the target variable
is qualitative (two or more categories). The loan
delinquency problem is an example of the binary
classification problem where two prediction classes
are “Delinquent” and “Non-delinquent.” Other
examples include predicting whether an email is spam
and handwritten character recognition.
Regression is a problem in which the target variable is
a quantitative value (numeric), such as predicting loan
default amount for each customer. Typical examples
include sales forecasting, price prediction, and loan
default amount prediction.
–Unsupervised learning involves learning from the input data
without any target. In this case, the algorithm tries to use an
underlying structure of the data to ﬁnd useful associations
and patterns. Most of the raw data in the world does not
have a well-deﬁned target variable; therefore, unsupervised
learning techniques are applicable to a lot of problems.
Typical problems include clustering and association:
Clustering is a problem of dividing the data into
similar homogenous groups. Typical examples of
clustering include identifying similar customers based
on purchase behavior (customer segmentation),
similar documents, and clustering similar news
articles.
Association is a problem of finding associations
between different variables that can describe
characteristics of the data. Popular examples include
market basket analysis to find bundled products as
they are mostly bought together—mobile phones
with covers, milk and butter, beer and diaper.
Choice of Models
Several machine learning models have been developed that
cater to diﬀerent realworld problems. To apply a machine
learning model, it is essential to identify the type of task:
supervised learning (classiﬁcation, regression) and
unsupervised learning (clustering, association). Table 6.7
summarizes a few modeling algorithms.
Table 6.7: Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Models
Type of Learning Models
Supervised learning Naive Bayes
Linear models, such as linear or logistic regression
Decision tree
K-nearest neighbors (k-NN)
Bagging, such as random forest
Boosting, such as generalized boosting machine
Support vector machines (SVMs)
Neural networks
Unsupervised learning Clustering, such as k-means, hierarchical, or DBScan
Associations, such as a priori
Each of these models has their uses, advantages, and
disadvantages. One of the popular algorithms is linear
regression or logistic regression when there is a linear
association of features with the target, that is, target linearly
increases or decreases with a change in features. In many
industrial applications, linear models are adopted as they are
simple and quite interpretable. However, these models can
have limitations in terms of predictive power as real-world
associations between features and target may be nonlinear. In
such cases, nonlinear models, such as decision trees, bagging,
boosting, neural networks, and support vector machines,
should be used.
Model Building
A model is just a mathematical function that can be used to
represent the relation between features in the data. Practically,
there is no perfect model. One can only attempt to create good
models that can meet business needs. Building a model can be
an iterative process: one may try several models, a diﬀerent
combination of features, and diﬀerent modeling techniques
before ﬁnding one that satisﬁes the requirement.
There are several ways to build a supervised machine learning
model, but typically, models include training, validation, and
testing, as reﬂected in the following standard steps:
1. Split the data randomly into two sets, namely training data
and validation data. A good starting point is a ratio of 80/20
(80 percent training data and 20 percent validation data).
2. Training data is used to train or teach the model to predict
the target using the features. At this step, an appropriate
model should be chosen based on the learning task.
3. Validation data is used to evaluate the performance of the
model. At this step, errors in the model should be analyzed
and used to make some adjustments to the models, such as
tuning the model, selecting features, and making other
decisions regarding the learning algorithm.
4. Lastly, the final model obtained after training and validation
is applied to an entirely new dataset called the test dataset to
which the model has not previously been exposed. The
performance on the test set indicates the actual
performance of the final model, or what performance to
expect when using the model in the real world.
Please note that the preceding steps are not ﬁxed and can vary
depending on the problem, data, and approach. There are many
diﬀerent ways to split the data into training and validation data,
create test sets, and perform additional steps to ensure model
stability. Figure 6.7 summarizes the dataset splitting and
modeling approach.
Figure 6.7: The modeling process
Building an unsupervised learning model is often more
challenging than supervised learning model. Unsupervised
learning models do not have a target; therefore, there is no way
to check whether the model is performing well or poorly
because there is no clear right answer. Often performance
needs to be evaluated using past experience and domain
knowledge. This makes model building quite a subjective
process.
Model Evaluation
As described above, there is no perfect model. Every model
suﬀers from some errors. The process to evaluate the prediction
errors of a machine learning model is called error analysis.
Ideally, each prediction output of a model should be checked to
examine the error and understand its underlying cause.
However, manually doing these checks is time-consuming,
especially with large datasets. Therefore, evaluation metrics are
needed to gauge the overall prediction performance of the
model.
Machine learning oﬀers a large choice of evaluation metrics
depending on the task involved. For classiﬁcation tasks,
comparisons can be made between correct and wrong
predictions of the true target by using a commonly used error
matrix called a confusion matrix. For regression tasks, errors
can be measured between the predicted target and true target.
Table 6.8 shows some of the commonly used evaluation metrics
for classiﬁcation and regression tasks.
Table 6.8: Evaluation Metrics for Different Tasks
Task Evaluation Metrics
Classification Accuracy, recall, precision, F-measure, AUC ROC
Regression Root mean squared error (RMSE), adjusted R-squared
Error Analysis
To evaluate the performance of any machine learning model,
errors need to be measured and analyzed. There are primarily
three sources of errors in any machine learning model,
irreducible errors, bias, and variance.
An irreducible error (Bayes error or unavoidable bias) is an
error that cannot be reduced regardless of the modeling
algorithm. This type of error can be introduced by problem
objective, noise and errors in the data capture; unknown
variables that can inﬂuence each other and the target; and
other factor. No model is perfect, so an expectation of 100-
percent accuracy is simply unrealistic. Therefore, the objective
of modeling is to create a model that comes as close as possible
to the desired performance.13
Bias is another error which is introduced due to erroneous
assumptions in the model while variance is an error due to
variability in the model predictions. In simple terms, this
concept is explained in the bulls-eye diagram in Figure 6.8.14
The center of the concentric circle represents a perfect model
which predicts all targets correctly, and each dot represents one
model. Sometimes the model prediction is close to the ideal
model prediction while sometimes it is far oﬀ.
Source: Fortmann-Roe, Scott, Understanding the Bias-Variance Tradeoff, htt
p://scott.fortmann-roe.com/docs/BiasVariance.html
Figure 6.8: Understanding bias and variance
Whereas bias measures how far oﬀ these model predictions are
