•	Designing and implementing preventative and detective controls into the analysis process 
leads to results that are accurate, valid, and reliable.
A data analysis plan increases the likelihood that analysis results accurately describe what 
happened, diagnose why it happened, predict what is likely to happen, or prescribe the best 
course forward. When the project plan is complete, so is the data analysis process planning 
stage, and it is time to move to the analysis stage. The next chapter describes how to properly 
prepare data for analysis. But first, practice using this project planning tool in an accounting 
context.
Sample Data Analysis Project Plan
Imagine you are a financial accountant for WeMakeIt, Inc., which is an employee-owned 3D 
printing corporation in Phoenix, Arizona. They sell superhero figurines, mechanical shop 
tools, and medical prostheses that are manufactured with 3D printing technologies. Founded 
five years ago by a local college student, Marisabel Cordoba, WeMakeIt, Inc. grew quickly to 
fill their production capacities and has maintained a stable size for the last three years.
Step 1: Focus on the Objective
The project in this example is to estimate the bad debts in the 2025 year-end accounts receiv-
able balance. The result will be the value estimate for the 2025 year-end adjusting journal 
entry that debits bad debts expense and credits the allowance for uncollectible accounts 
contra-asset. 

4-4  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.1: Estimate Bad Debts
The U.S. GAAP ending accounts receivable method requires the following:
•	 The year-end accounts receivable balance can be considered in total or in age group subtotals. 
Age grouping rules for manufacturing companies are typically less than 30 days, 30 to 60 days, 
and greater than 60 days outstanding, but these vary by industry.
•	 Reviewing regulatory guidance, industry practices, business policies and processes, and past 
bad debt estimation percentages is the professional approach for selecting bad debt estima-
tion percentages. Typically, as the age of the accounts receivable increases, the percentage 
uncollectible applied to that age also increases (Knowledge).
Assume the following for this example:
•	The company offers its credit customers payment terms of 30 days.
•	The 2025 year-end accounts receivable balance in the general ledger is $83,734.30.
•	The 2025 year-end unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts has a credit balance 
of $3,000.
•	WeMakeIt, Inc. decided to use the percentage of year-end accounts receivable method to 
estimate bad debts expense each year. They have authorized a 2% bad debts assumption 
for invoices that are 30 to 60 days outstanding and 30% for invoices that are outstanding 
for more than 60 days.
This data analysis project has the following objective and related questions:
•	Objective: Accurately estimate bad debts within the year-end accounts receivable bal-
ance in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
•	Specific questions: 
	 1.  What is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receivables in the 2025 year-end 
outstanding accounts receivables? 
	 2.  What amount should be used in the adjusting journal entry for bad debts expense?
With the objective defined and the questions articulated, it is time to develop the data strategy.
Step 2: Select the Data Strategy
Develop several data alternatives that could help answer the objective question. Then, to select 
the most useful data alternative for the project plan, identify the factors you want to use to 
rank these alternatives, and assign values to each alternative’s factors. The best data strategy 
alternative is the one with the highest overall factor ratings.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.2: Consider Different 
Perspectives
The net realizable value of accounts receivable (accounts receivable minus the allowance for 
uncollectible accounts) is reported on the balance sheet as a current asset. The bad debts 
expense reduces net income reported on the income statement. Keep in mind that parties with 
very different perspectives use this information for decision-making (Stakeholders):
•	 Creditors, who want to be repaid, are interested in the liquidity of the assets.
•	 Shareholders, who predict future stock values as well as dividend expectations, must under-
stand the expected future cash inflows from operations.
•	 Managers want to earn bonuses that are determined by growth in net income and total assets. 
The change in the allowance for uncollectible accounts will influence both amounts.

4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-5
There are a few data strategy alternatives that could be considered either individually or in 
combination for this project:
•	All credit sales invoices and collections data that pertain to the accounting period.
•	All outstanding invoices included in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	The prior year-end’s adjusted account balance and the current year-end’s unadjusted 
account balance in the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
•	Current year’s total accounts receivable write-offs.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for accounts receivable age categories.
Recall that the objective question for this analysis project asks for a reasonable estimate of 
the year-end uncollectible accounts receivables. Because WeMakeIt, Inc. uses the GAAP per-
centage of ending accounts receivables method with the three age categories typical for man-
ufacturing companies, the data that would be most useful considering the objectives would 
include:
•	The outstanding invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	This year’s unadjusted allowance for uncollectible account balance.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for each accounts receivable age group.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.3: Choose the Data Strategy 
that Fits Your Objective
Both data and analysis strategies are improved when they are developed, evaluated, and ranked 
by the factor values placed on each potential data strategy: 
•	 Factors that value data relevance, such as expected future collections, prior estimation 
­errors, and expected risk of uncollectibility should be used to select the best data strategy for 
­WeMakeIt, Inc’s analysis plan (Alternatives). 
•	 Using the data from outstanding invoices, the unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts 
receivable, and authorized bad debt estimation percentages was the best choice for WeMakeIt, 
Inc’s analysis. These data choices best match the objective of the analysis, which is to calculate 
a reasonable estimate for the year-end uncollectible accounts ­receivable (Purpose).
•	 For a personal example, if your objective was to dress successfully for an interview, then you 
could develop, evaluate, and rank the alternatives of wearing something you already own, 
borrowing from a friend, or buying something new to wear to the interview. Using clothes you 
already own would rank higher than buying new clothes if you were ranking ­options based on 
lowest costs and time factors. 
Step 3: Select the Analysis Strategy
For any project plan, choosing the best analysis strategy involves considering and evaluating 
several possible alternative analyses given the objective questions and the already selected 
strategy for the data. The analysis alternatives in this bad debt estimation example involve 
different methods for determining the age of an outstanding invoice:
•	Days outstanding from the invoice date forward.
•	Days outstanding from the due date forward.
The first analysis alternative is preferable because WeMakeIt, Inc.’s policy is to allow custom-
ers 30 days to pay their invoices and because they estimate bad debts only when an invoice is 
past its due date, which is equal to or more than 30 days outstanding.
Therefore, the first question, what is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receiv-
ables in the 2025 year-end outstanding accounts receivables, will be answered by summing 

4-6  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
each age group’s estimated bad debts value. This is a measure estimating the uncollectible 
portion of the year-end accounts receivable balance (­Illustration 4.2). ( Data See How To 
4.1 at the end of the chapter to learn how to calculate the figures in this illustration.)
ILLUSTRATION 4.2  WeMakeIt, Inc.: Estimated Value of Uncollectible Receivables
Total accounts receivable value
x % uncollectible
$ Estimated as uncollectible
Total
$ 30,099.29
0%
$                  0
< 30 days
$ 20,441.46
2%
$       408.83
30–60 days
$ 33,193.55
30%
$   9,958.07
$ 83,734.30
$ 10,366.89
> 60 days
The second question, what value should be used in the adjusting journal entry at year-end 
for bad debts expense, will be answered when this total of $ 10,366.89 is reduced by the unad-
justed year-end allowance for uncollectible accounts balance ($ 3,000). The resulting calcu-
lated value is the year-end adjusting journal entry debiting bad debt expense and crediting 
allowance for uncollectible accounts:
Debit
Credit
Bad debts expense
$ 7,366.89
    Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$ 7,366.89
Increasing the allowance account’s $3,000 unadjusted balance by $ 7,366.89 will result in an 
adjusted balance of $ 10,366.89, equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts in accounts 
receivable at the 2025 year end. Illustration 4.3 summarizes the first three steps of this 
­project’s plan.
ILLUSTRATION 4.3  In-Progress Project Plan for Estimating Year-End Bad Debts: Steps 1-3
3
4
5
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
Data Strategy Risks
Data Strategy Controls
2 Data Strategy
1. Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
2. Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
3. Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 days, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30-60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
     for the adjusting entry value.
This total answers
the first project
plan question
This result answers
the second project
plan question
This project plan is
incomplete. The steps
for evaluating risks
and embedding
controls are
covered next. 
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
How To

4.1 How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects? 4-7
 The last two steps are considering risks and controls for both the data strategy and the analy-
sis strategy. First we will evaluate the data strategy’s risks and controls, and then the analysis 
strategy risks and controls. 
Steps 4 and 5: Data Strategy Risks and Controls
 While organizations invest in processes and controls designed to capture accounting data 
correctly, accounting databases inevitably have some data issues.  In this example, the data 
include the 2025 year-end accounts receivable outstanding invoices and the authorized bad 
debt estimation percentages. There could be some risks to using this accounts receivable data:
•  Missing or incorrectly included invoices in the general or the subsidiary ledger. 
•  Errors in the invoice due date fields or the invoice total amounts. 
•  Errors created when the data are exported from the AIS system into the analysis tool. 
 APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.4: Threats to Data Strategy 
 Data risks can impact the accuracy and validity of analysis results. These risks must be evalu-
ated so appropriate controls can be added to the project plan.  Data strategy risks can include 
( Risks ):
•  Dirty data such as incomplete data, inaccurate data, and incorrectly formatted data fields. 
•  Data irrelevant to the objective of the project. 
•  Insuff icient data for the analysis to be reliable. 
•  Data that is an unrepresentative sample of the underlying population. 
•  Errors in management estimates and assumptions about the data. 
 These data risks can be controlled by comparing the extracted data to the source invoice and 
collection documents. Possible risks involving the management’s estimates of bad debt per-
centages include human bias embedded in the authorized bad debt percentages, changes in 
customer payment behavior, and business process changes to credit customer approvals and 
collection practices.
Company Accountant
External Auditor
These invoices are
99% collectible!
Only 86% of these
seem collectible...
 One way to control for these risks is to ask the finance, sales, and accounts receivable man-
agers if there were changes to the customer base, market conditions, or business policies and 
procedures for credit approval, write-offs, or collection policies during the year. This knowl-
edge could confirm existing bad debt percentages or motivate their adjustment. 
 Another control for evaluating the risks in management estimates and assumptions is 
to compare current data to prior year data. Evaluating increases in the median number of 
days outstanding and the number of new to returning customers in each age group can offer 
insights into the reasonableness of bad debt estimation percentages. 
 To illustrate, imagine you were wondering if the 30% bad debt percentage for invoices 
greater than 60 days outstanding was a reasonable management assumption in 2025. 

4-8  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.4 demonstrates that the median number of days outstanding in the greater 
than 60 days outstanding group increased in 2025.
ILLUSTRATION 4.4  Data Risk 
in Bad Debt Percentages: Median 
Days Outstanding
Aging Categories
30–60 days
45
61
> 60 days
2024 and 2025 Past-Due Accounts Receivable
Median Days Outstanding per Age Group
0
20
40
60
80
100
2024
2025
95
95
55
Additionally, you might wonder if this increase was caused by new customers, as the pay-
ment habits of new customers are more uncertain than those of continuing customers. 
Illustration 4.5 shows that the > 60 days age group has many outstanding invoices from 
new customers.
ILLUSTRATION 4.5  Data Risk in 
Bad Debt Percentages: Risks from 
New Customers
30–60 days
> 60 days
Comparing Past-Due Invoices for New Customers
vs. Returning Customers by Age Group
$0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
Returning Customer
New Customer
