

--- Page 365 ---

previously. Robo-advisor and AI-driven trading platforms are
now becoming common in the field of portfolio management.
As the costs of hardware fall, we can expect a substantial
increase in the future uses of AI by financial institutions which
will then affect the ways that financial institutions operate and
provide services.
AI has come to play an integral role in many phases of the
financial ecosystem from managing assets to accessing risks.
The present and future applications include AI algorithmic
trading, robo-advisor, chatbots, fraud detection, and loan/
insurance underwriting.
AI Algorithmic Trading
Algorithmic/quantitative trading has been used by hedge funds
or other financial institutions since the 1970s. Today, AI has
become the new emerging trend in the asset management
landscape. Unlike traditional trading algorithms that were built
to exploit specific market opportunities such as identifying the
trend of price movement, AI has the power to truly act as an
independent agent participating in market action.
Big data and various forms of artificial intelligence, such as
ML and NLP, have changed the asset management industry.
Using NLP tools, the machine can analyze the company’s
revenue calls to detect changes in management sentiment that
may signal future performance and screen through the analyst
report to indicate terms that are about to change its headline
forecast. These tools can also be used to analyze a large number


--- Page 366 ---

of unstructured data sources (such as news reports, blogs, and
social media) to identify potential investment trends.
Advances in AI are being used to improve research and
make informed investment decisions. In addition, big data and
AI are also boosting automation and efficiencies across client
servicing, 
data 
management, 
operational 
support, 
and
compliance.
Robo-Advisors
Robo-advisors are online financial advisors that provide
automated, algorithm-driven financial investment services.
Robo-advisors are becoming an increasingly popular and
convenient way for the individual to invest and manage
portfolios. According to IDC Financial Insight (Araneta,
Agrawal, & Kapoor, 2017), the hybrid model that combines
traditional and robo-advisory will be the winner in the market.
The total asset under management (AUM) by robo-advisors will
reach US$500b by 2021 in APAC.
For those interested in robo-advisors, refer to Chapter 19.
Chatbots
A chatbot is a human-computer dialog system relying on
auditory or textual methods. It has been widely used in our
daily life. Many companies use the virtual chatbots built into
social media platforms like WhatsApp, Facebook, or WeChat.
WeChat’s chatbot can, for example, call a taxi, check in for a
flight, report traffic accidents, and make medical appointments.


--- Page 367 ---

Most advanced chatbots use sophisticated NLP systems. Some
simple chatbots scan for keywords within the input and then
reply with the most matching keywords from a preset database.
Many banks and insurers leverage chatbots to respond to
customer’s inquiries. Chatbots not only significantly improve
the service efficiency, but can also become a marketing channel
to promote customer engagement as well as client acquisition.
More importantly, chatbots collect user’s information. Big data
allows 
the 
company 
to 
know 
more 
about 
customer’s
preferences. Targeted marketing then becomes possible.
Simpler chatbots are provided by social media platforms, and
are cost-effective and easy to maintain.
Fraud Detection
The frequency of online financial fraud attempts has been
increasing over time. Fraud detection is tricky, as fraud means
change from time to time. One major challenge is to detect
“Black Swan”–like fraud events, which are events that rarely
happen but will bring about catastrophic losses if they
happened. Fraud detection systems in the past were rule-based.
The main defect of a rule-based system is that it cannot detect
unidentified fraud means. As there is little data on such Black
Swan–like fraud cases due to their low frequency of
occurrences, detection using the old rule-based system is nearly
impossible. 
Modern 
advanced 
fraud 
systems 
adopt
sophisticated machine learning models to detect the potential
fraud, which implies that fraud can be flagged before it
happens. Rather than general machine learning black boxes, a


--- Page 368 ---

fraud system is called “white boxing,” which consists of a
scoring system based on local linear approximation, a text
mining system, graph generation, and a visualization system. It
can thus detect emerging patterns by learning new data and
generate a probability of potential fraud.
Loan/Insurance Underwriting
Traditional credit evaluation typically involves the applicant’s
FICO scores, debt to income ratio, and a number of inquiries
into the financial status/employment state of the applicants. In
recent years, as the AI ability to extract highly relevant
information for a specific purpose from a massive amount of
big 
data 
has 
greatly 
increased, 
online 
loan/insurance
underwriting has become possible.
Many AI-enabled credit assessment systems have emerged
and small loan underwriters tend to employ such an end-to-end
AI credit system to assess borrower’s credit using large
amounts of data from social and ecommerce media, which has
not been traditionally used for credit evaluation. The
customers’ behavioral traits from social media such as the
contents of text messages, the patterns of call history,
geolocation information, and mobile transaction, are valuable
information. Such information provides insight into customers’
identity, incomes, and expenses. The system adopts algorithms
and machine learning to find useful patterns in the data and
generates a default probability to gauge the suitability of the
applicant for a loan. The whole underwriting process can be
done using the mobile phone very quickly, even within 10


--- Page 369 ---

minutes. The granted loan can be transferred to the applicant’s
bank account or e-wallets within 15 minutes which enhances
customer experience.
Similarly, insurance underwriting can also leverage on an AI
system to extract and analyze data containing information on
the applicant’s hazard likelihood, historical claims, life attitude,
and so on to generate an insurance quote quickly.
The AI underwriting system is superior as it can evaluate the
borrowers without loan/ insurance histories that are essential
in 
traditional 
underwriting. 
Compared 
to 
traditional
underwriting, banks and insurance companies will benefit
from AI-based underwriting as it reduces employee costs and
may also lead to a decrease in fraud cases as the social media
data comes from the applicant’s real life activities. The
interested reader may refer to Chapter 23, a dedicated chapter
on InsurTech.
Last but not least, AI will also assist compliance officers to
ensure 
regulatory 
compliance. 
For 
example, 
AI-driven
compliance system learns and complies with all applicable
regulations such as know-your-client (KYC) and anti-money
laundering (AML) regulations. It scans financial transactions to
detect signs of money laundering or other illegal activities,
which are not easy to be identified manually. The interested
reader may refer to Chapter 21, a dedicated chapter on RegTech
in this textbook.
In conclusion, AI technologies lead to a new era of efficiency
and performance. We expect deep learning to be widely
adopted within the next decade.


--- Page 370 ---

Endnotes
1 Artificial Neural Network is a system inspired by human brain neural activities. It
simulates the way in which the human brain processes information. The system
consists of a large number of nodes (or neurons) segregated into layers and gathers
its knowledge by detecting the patterns and relationships in data and learning
through the training experience.
2 Support vector machine (SVM) is a supervised machine-learning algorithm, which
is based on the idea of finding a hyperplane that best divides a dataset into two
classes. SVM can be used for both classification or regression challenges.
3 A sigmoid function is a mathematical function having an S-shaped curve (sigmoid
curve), and is defined by the formula S(t)=1/(1+e–t).
References
AIINDEX. (2017). Artificial Intelligence Index, 2017 Annual Report. AIINDEX.ORG.
Araneta, M., Agrawal, A., & Kapoor, S. (2017). Robo-Advisory: Changing the Face of Wealth
in Asia/ Pacific. IDC Perspective.
Cho, K., Van Merrienboer, B., Caglar, G., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., &
Bengio, Y. (2014). Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder
for statistical machine translation. arXiv:1406.1078.
Deng, L., & Yu, D. (2011). Deep convex network: A scalable architecture for deep
learning. INTERSPEECH (28). Florence, Italy: ISCA.
Feigenbaum E.A., 1977, The Art of Artificial Intelligence: Themes and Case Studies of
Knowledge Engineering, International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pp 1014–1029.
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997, 11 15). Long short-term memory. Neural
computation, Vol. 9, Issue 8, pp. 1735–1780.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems: An introductory analysis
with applications to biology, control, and artificial intelligence. Ann Arbor: University


--- Page 371 ---

of Michigan Press.
Kanungo, R. P. (2004, 4 26). Genetic algorithms: genesis of stock evaluation. Economics
WPA, p. 17.
LeCun, Yann. (1989). Generalization and network design strategies. Technical Report
CRG-TR-89-4, University of Toronto, 326–345.
Lin, L., Cao, L., Wang, J., & Zhang, C. (2004). The applications of genetic algorithms in
stock market data mining optimisation. Data Mining V, Data Mining, Text Mining and
Their Business Application, pp. 273–280. WIT Press.
Werbos, P. J. (1974). Beyond regression: new tools for predicion and analysis in the
behavioral sciences. PhD thesis. Harvard University.
Dr. Bing Li is the Managing Director at Yuanyin Asset
Management and takes the Overall Management Oversight of the
company. Before that, he was the president of Forwin Capital
Management, a Hong Kong based multi-family office. Previously,
he worked as an investment management professional at
Lombard Odier, ING Investment Management, Pearl Insurance
Group, ABP Investment, and TD Asset management, managed
billions of dollars assets ranged from global equities, bonds, to
fund of funds. Bing earned his Ph.D. in Chemistry from University
of Western Ontario, and B.S. and M.S. degrees in Material Science
and Engineering from Shanghai Jiaotong University. He is also a
CFA charter holder.
Dr. Min Cao is an Investment Manager at UCF Asset
Management, focusing on global asset allocation and active
equity strategies. Previously, Min worked as Investment Manager
at Forwin Capital Management and Quantitative Analyst at Delta
Asia Financial Group, with the research scope covers global asset


--- Page 372 ---

allocation, high dividend Hong Kong stock hedging, and best stop
loss strategy. Prior to that, she was a Senior Research Associate
in the Department of Economics and Finance of the City
University of Hong Kong, where she worked on macroeconomics
and international finance. Min graduated from South China
University of Technology, and obtained her master’s degree in
High Performance Computing from Trinity College Dublin, the
University of Dublin, and Ph. D from the IMSE department at the
University of Hong Kong.
OceanofPDF.com


--- Page 373 ---

Chapter 12
A Practical Approach to Machine Learning
(ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
In the previous chapter, the reader would have gained an
understanding of the technologies underpinning machine
learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). This chapter aims
to complement the previous chapters by providing a more
practice-oriented approach to demystifying both technologies
and to introduce the reader to the process of setting up a ML
solution. We will succinctly recap some of the key concepts
previously covered, but the readers should refer to the
dedicated chapters on data science and big data for details.
Are AI and Machine Learning the Same Thing?
While it may seem that neural networks, deep learning,
machine learning, and artificial intelligence are all the same
concepts, each has its own history and origin, as well as
hierarchy. The reason it might be hard to see this distinction is
that all the research and media attention around the last
decade of advances zoom in specifically on deep learning.
To aid in deciphering the many conflicting and overlapping
terms used in this field, we will define an overall hierarchy to
help break down the relationships within artificial intelligence.


--- Page 374 ---

Figure 12.1: AI to ML to NN to DL
To put it simply, artificial intelligence is the capability of any
system to exhibit intelligent behavior. Almost everything
relevant today in AI relates to machine learning.
Machine Learning Covers a Lot
Let us succinctly recap machine learning, which as a term
contains its own definition. Instead of the human telling the
machine what decisions and rules to make, the human teaches
it. A machine that learns. This leaves the methods of teaching
and learning open-ended. What can you teach a machine, and
what can it learn? We briefly summarize the primary machine
learning methods in Figure 12.2 and in words below.


--- Page 375 ---

Figure 12.2: Primary machine-learning methods
–
Classification algorithms can be taught to split existing data
into predefined groups, such as names of animals. When you
feed the algorithm some new data it has not yet seen, it will
predict which group the new data belongs to—for example,
that this animal is a chicken.
–
Regression algorithms basically try to learn the function of
a dataset, by predicting future data based on past data. If
you have a series of data points that form a straight line, the
algorithm will attempt to describe that line as a function. Of
course, the line could be curved, a wave, a circle, or any kind
of shape. While helpful to think of two-dimensional
examples you can plot in your mind, these algorithms also
work on any number of input dimensions.
–
Unsupervised learning can be used if you have lots of data
with patterns, groups, or clusters that you wish to separate
without explicitly defining them beforehand—that is,
without human supervision. Perhaps you know that the
dataset is comprised of different animals, and want to
establish how many different kinds by clustering them using
variables like weight and speed.


--- Page 376 ---

