–
Reinforcement learning has been widely popularized by
the media attention on Deepmind’s various game playing
algorithms including the famed AlphaGo. These algorithms
learn to choose actions through the use of rewards given
based on the results of those actions in the game
environment. Due to several breakthrough results such as
AlphaGo, reinforcement methods have been an active area
of research.
While the last two methods will continue to garner many
headlines, the first two are more applicable to industries with a
much lower learning curve. The rest of this chapter will mainly
focus on classification and regression. There are many ways to
implement both, and a neural network, which we have learned
in the previous chapter, is just one approach. To ensure that the
reader can follow the practical examples later, we will quickly
revisit neural networks and recall how these fit under ML.
Neural Networks Are a Special Type of Machine Learning
Neural networks and the associated learning algorithms hold a
special place within the machine learning community, largely
due to the fact that their design is inspired by the brain. We
know that neurons are connected in vast networks inside our
brain, and that electrical signals go from neuron to neuron to
produce all of our conscious experiences—seeing, hearing,
thinking, and speaking—which involve all neural networks in
action, as far as science can tell us today.1


--- Page 377 ---

Figure 12.3: Simple neural network with weighted connections between
layers
What is inside a neural network? Neurons organized into
inputs (the left portion in Figure 12.3), hidden layers (the
middle portion in Figure 12.3), and outputs (the right portion in
Figure 12.3). Connections between these neurons have weights
and biases. The neurons, or nodes, themselves have activation
functions, which act as filters on the input data. The primary
function of all these elements is to introduce complex
behaviors. Otherwise, you could only perform basic functions
like adding numbers together. Combining these elements across
hundreds or even thousands of neurons in several layers, these
complex behaviors become very powerful indeed. This is called
deep learning.


--- Page 378 ---

Figure 12.4: A neural network with a few more layers introduces increased
complexity and is called a deep neural network
The types of neural networks used for relatively simple tasks
like recognition of handwriting can contain hundreds of nodes
in each layer, to a point where drawing the thousands of
connections no longer helps. These specialized networks
process parts of an image at the rate of a few pixels at a time to
determine its contents.
Figure 12.5: Convolutional neural network used for image recognition


--- Page 379 ---

Still, even a large neural network can be represented visually in
rather simple terms, yet the inner behavior becomes almost
indecipherable. It can learn almost anything with a learning
process called “backpropagation,” which starts by comparing
how far the prediction is from the intended outcome. Then it
calculates a series of minute changes for the connection weights
across that whole network to improve that prediction, and tries
the prediction again to see if the result becomes better or
worse. To achieve the desired prediction accuracy, this process
will be repeated hundreds of times across large datasets of
millions of inputs, creating the need for significant computing
power and therefore computing costs.
What can you achieve with this powerful learning
approach? Neural networks can read handwriting. They can
generate language, too. They can recognize objects in pictures,
or faces, and even play chess—all at human level or beyond.
The complexity of the learning behavior also means that it is
challenging to explain predictions or decisions for each case.
You can change one input by a fraction, and the whole output
changes. Why does the learning work? When does it work?
How do we find the best and fastest way to train the network?
While this spans an active area of research, there is no
definitive answer today.
Should We Always Use Neural Networks?
In theory, the benefit of neural networks is their flexibility to
tackle many forms of data. In practice, their lack of clear
explanation and degree of specific configuration, or tuning,


--- Page 380 ---

means that they are harder to work with. The following
demonstration will illustrate the differences in behavior.
Figure 12.6: Comparing classifier behavior
On the left, you see three datasets with a white background.
Going from left to right, each column represents a type of
machine learning algorithm trying to separate the black dots
from the white dots using only a part of the dataset called test
data. Remember, we have informed each algorithm already
which color each dot is. The algorithm is just trying to create a
general rule to identify the area in which black dots appear,
and the area where white dots appear. As evident, the
approaches and results are quite diverse.
The bottom right corner of each square shows how
accurately the algorithm has separated the two types of dots.
Again, this score is based on a different group of dots than we
used to train the algorithm. Why would we do this? If you tested


