CHAPTER 9
Automating Internal Controls Assessment
RECENTLY, PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (PWC) settled two major
high‐profile malpractice lawsuits in the UK. In the two cases (MF Global
and Taylor Bean & Whitaker), the allegations against PwC indicated that
the plaintiffs expected the audit firm to go beyond the management
assertions and include management decision‐making in the scope of the
audit. Another firm, travel company Thomas Cook, was also audited by
PwC between 2007 and 2016. Between 2017 and the collapse of Thomas
Cook in 2019, Ernst & Young (EY) took over as the auditors. Upon
investigation it was discovered that PwC provided remuneration advice to
Thomas Cook, and that while both firms, PwC and EY, had information
about the deep problems facing Thomas Cook, both gave clean audit reports
to Thomas Cook. Commenting on audit failures, Bob Moritz, global
chairman of PwC, said, “The expectations of the market is above the
regulatory requirement. When big failures happen, it is not necessarily an
audit failure. The controls might be appropriate, but the continuation of the
business, its financial position and long‐term sustainability can still be in
question” (Kinder, 2019).
Would it be possible for PwC and EY to gain deeper insights about
their clients' material weaknesses in internal controls, even before an
audit is launched?
Is it possible for PwC to develop greater insights into the business
operations of a firm?
How can management, board, and the audit committee receive
continuous evaluation of audit controls?
How can new and emerging risks be identified and mitigated?
Can audit expand its scope without incurring greater cost?
Answers to these and many other similar questions greatly depend upon the
automation strategy of internal controls. In this chapter we develop a

comprehensive strategic approach to automate internal controls assessment
and audit.
AUTOMATING INTERNAL CONTROLS
ASSESSMENT
Unlike the inherent risk, which is embedded in the strategic choices made
by the firm due to its business model, industry, etc., the internal controls
risk is a function of actions of management teams and boards. In 1993, the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO) presented a framework, which has become the standard for internal
controls. COSO defined internal control as (COSO, 2013):
Internal control is a process, effected by an entity's board of directors,
management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following
three categories:
Reliability of financial reporting.
Effectiveness and efficiency of operations.
Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
The COSO standard is based upon three objectives – effectiveness and
efficiency of operations, reliable financial reporting, and compliance with
laws and regulations. This means that the controls exist to achieve the three
objectives. The first objective of effectiveness and efficiency of operations
is based upon the corporate objectives as determined by the board and the
senior leadership teams and constitute the primary goals that the firm must
achieve to fulfill its strategy. The second objective of reliable financial
reporting is based upon the assertions made by the firm and the numbers
and disclosures reported about the financial performance of the firm. The
third objective aims to ensure that the firm abides by the laws and
regulations applicable to its business and industry.
For each objective, internal controls are built with the following five
components: (1) control environment, (2) risk assessment, (3) control
activities, (4) monitoring, and (5) information and communication. Each of

the components is supported by principles and, as of 2013, 17 principles are
part of the framework.
At this point it is important to note that audit automation can be viewed as a
combination of tool‐driven (where auditors don't rely upon any human‐
provided information) and human‐based evidence collection. Auditees
provide information in the form of data requests, access to systems and
information, and responses to specific informational requests in the form of
reports, questions and answers, forms, etc. Automated tools do not rely
upon human‐provided information and instead they directly access evidence
from the source such as data, the databases, and the applications. Human‐
based evidence collection relies upon surveys and questionnaires. Artificial
intelligence (AI) has a role to play in both areas and while this chapter
primarily focuses upon the tools, the human‐centric surveys and
questionnaires automation involves the ability to generate and analyze
surveys and questionnaires. We will cover human surveys and
questionnaires in a following chapter.
Previous studies using AI methods of self‐organizing maps (SOMs) based
clustering techniques have suggested that internal controls form a complex
nexus of capabilities where a firm may have one or more strong
components (e.g., control activities and monitoring) but not all areas.
Furthermore, firms may have strong components for one objective but not
all three (Länsiluoto et al., 2016). Recall that there are three objectives:
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, reliable financial reporting, and
compliance with laws and regulations. To design an automated system, our
strategy needs to cover all three COSO objectives and the related five
components.
When designing an automated internal control system, our broad strategy is
as follows:
Approach the problem as an integrated interaction of various agents
(both deterministic and stochastic).
Use a variety of technologies, including process mining, machine
learning, RPA, and expert systems.
Check for internal control weaknesses that are embedded in the design
of the client firm and hence create an environment ripe for errors and

frauds, and to predict if a fraudulent activity is taking place.
Use integrated internal controls system to perform continuous
assessment.
Apply integrated internal controls system to create an exhaustive
assessment (i.e., the entire population is analyzed vs. a sample).
Evolve and grow the system with business.
FIGURE 9.1 Automation of Internal Controls Evaluation
Automated risk assessment is composed of three areas: audit risk
evaluation, inherent risk evaluation, and internal controls evaluation. Audit
risk is a function of inherent risk, controls risk, and detection risk. In the
previous chapter we covered the inherent risk. Inherent risk is the risk that
exists in the absence of any internal controls. Internal controls risk happens
when a firm does not have proper internal controls to manage and control
the inherent risks. The lack of controls can be due to a firm's practices or
design. It can happen intentionally or unintentionally. Internal controls can
be evaded, overridden, or bypassed when management engages in fraud.
Thus, while inherent risk is embedded in the nature of the business, internal
controls risk is very much a product of how a firm is managed. When
auditors observe gaps in internal controls, they are supposed to increase
their substantive procedures to reduce or minimize the chances of
misstatement.

As shown in Figure 9.1, to automate the internal controls evaluation, we
follow the COSO model and break it down into five capability areas of
automated environment evaluation, automated risk assessment, automated
control activities assessment, automated monitoring assessment, and
automated information and communications evaluation. Each of the areas is
automated with various agents that work in a coordinated and collaborative
manner to achieve total automation.
AUTOMATED CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
The principles of control environment (Figure 9.2) are
The organization demonstrates a commitment to integrity and ethical
values.
FIGURE 9.2 Automated Environment Evaluation
The board of directors demonstrates independence from management
and exercises oversight of the development and performance of
internal control.

Management establishes, with board oversight, structures, reporting
lines, and appropriate authorities and responsibilities in the pursuit of
objectives.
The organization demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop, and
retain competent individuals in alignment with objectives.
The organization holds individuals accountable for their internal
control responsibilities in the pursuit of objectives.
The assessment of control's environment is an inquiry about the patterns of
human values and actions. For example, the word “organization” in the first
principle implies there are one or more humans who demonstrate
commitment to integrity and ethical values. Commitment is a cognitive
construct and manifests via human communications and actions. At this
time, we do not have reliable technology to observe what transpires in
people's minds, but we can observe patterns about humans and human
behavior that can provide us information about their mental or cognitive
constructs. For example, speech, choice of words, gestures, and body
language (including physiological information) can give us clues about the
cognitive constructs. These could be general – or specific to a domain. For
example, a general assessment can reveal the personality of a person and
can be classified as aggressive versus passive. A specific assessment will
search for speech (verbal, written) for values.
Thus, designing a system to assess the controls environment will be
composed of:
An agent that gauges the cognitive constructs of management teams
(values, ethics, personalities, integrity, and others).
An agent that gauges the cognitive constructs of management teams
and boards specific to the task structure (e.g., values or personality
types to function during a specific challenge for a firm or for the
specific objective of financial reporting).
An agent that determines if the board has undertaken the responsibility
of the oversight, structures, responsibilities, and authorities.
An agent that determines that Board separation with the management
team, and exercises oversight over the development and performance

of internal controls.
An agent that measures and provides feedback on the firm's
commitment to attract, develop, and retain competent individuals.
An agent that evaluates accountability.
The above agents, once trained, form the integrated control environment
system.
Integrity, Ethics, Personality, and Values
This system was explained in the audit preplanning chapter. We will
reexamine it here from an internal (vs. external) system perspective. The
auditor has access to significantly more documents internally than
analyzing a company from the outside. In today's world, pictures, voice, and
video data can also be requested and obtained. The core version of this
system is natural language processing, which analyzes the written
communications of the management team and the board members to search
for words that signify integrity, ethics, values, and personality. As
previously mentioned, this approach has been deployed to study the fraud
risk from linguistic and vocal patterns of earnings calls (Throckmorton et
al., 2015) as well as from documents (Management's Discussion and
Analysis (MD&A) section of the Form10‐K) (Humpherys et al., 2011). The
agent is expected to evaluate how much of management and board
communication is applied to values and ethics. The input documents used
for these analyses may include reports, messages, board meeting minutes,
emails, and other communications. Using that as input, a classification
engine is deployed that, based upon words, evaluates the presence, depth,
and frequency of ethics and integrity‐related discussions in the normal
course of business operations.
Another, more complicated, way is to get data from communications of
leaders of a firm that engaged in fraud and study the patterns of their
expression versus the patterns of the firms that provided proper returns and
met the fiduciary obligations.

Board of Directors
The board documents and emails, including the minutes from the audit
committee meetings, are analyzed to determine the presence of discussions,
guidance, directives, and references to ethics, values, and integrity. The
same can be done to assess the references to internal controls. This reveals
the instances where the references to the internal controls were made. The
email analysis also reveals the communications flow, authority, and the
nature of relationship in the organization.
The features used for email can be composed of metadata of emails, number
of emails, headers, text, attachment or no attachment, signed emails,
forwarded, replied to, cc'd, blind copied, and other features related to
frequency of emails.
Management Philosophy and Operating Style
We briefly touched upon this area in a previous chapter where our model
was based upon external data. Here we use the internal data to evaluate
management philosophy and operating style. Once again natural language
processing can give us an excellent start to understand the management
philosophy and operating style.
Management philosophy and style can be observed by the language used by
the management team, the social networks within the organization, and the
company culture. HR files, court documents, and websites such as
Glassdoor provide excellent data for modeling. Using machine learning,
your goal is to train your algorithm to classify the culture of a firm in
various classes. This can be viewed as a problem of classifying the
management team into various buckets of operating styles, management
philosophies, and management models. For instance, you can determine if
the management style is authoritarian or collaborative, closed versus open,
delegation centric versus empowerment based. Employee behavior in
organizations can be predicted by deploying machine learning and data
mining textual information such as emails (Straub et al., 2016).
Organizational Structure
The organizational structure assessment comes from multiple angles. The
analytical capability is systematically built by layering the following