
financial system23 as long as it is uncontrollable.
It is worth mentioning that it is very difficult to get accurate and up-to-
date information about the number and volume of virtual currencies in
circulation. The majority of virtual currency schemes have insignificant
market capitaliz ations of below €1 million and only 21 exceed this figure;
only the top eight are above €10 million.24 Bitcoin25 is clearly the largest
and most well-established virtual currency , with a market capitalization of
more than $28 billion.26 On the other hand, Litecoin is scripted on an open-
source global payment network  that is never controlled centr ally by any
authority and uses a “scrypt” as proof of ledger , which can be decrypted
through a consumer -grade CPU. It could be said that Litecoin has a faster
block generation  rate compared to Bitcoin and thus presents a much faster
transaction validation. Ethereum was launched in 2015 and is a
decentralized software platform that permits Smart Contracts and
Distributed Applications to establish and run without any downtime,
control, impedim ent, fraud, control from any other third party . Zcash is a
more secure, open-source, decentralized digital cryptocurrency launched at
the end of 2016 , and it is regarded as more secure because all transactions
are recorded and registered on a blockchain with details about sending and
receiving parties, and the sum transferred remains secure by presenting a
provision for shielded transactio ns. There are also a number of post-Bitcoin
virtual currencie s that claim to be superior to Bitcoin, includin g Litecoin,
GeistGeld, SolidCoin, BBQcoin, and PPCoin,27 Dash (Darkcoin), Ripple
(XRP), and Monero (XMR). It is worth mentioning that command
regulation has a reputation for being inflexible, which means  suffocating
competition and inhibiting enterprise and growth. On the other hand,
flexibility is a problem with regulatory technology , but being  capable of
delivering more precise regulation. Even though precision is desired in
financial regulation as in any other field of law, it comes at the price of
flexibility . Computer scientists must solve this problem by developing
software that operates within flexible legal terms.
Under English law, cryptocurren cies are to be treated as property and so
the UKJT  accepted that cryptocurrencies have the characteristics of
property , including being definable, capable of being owned and
transferred, and having value.28 Hence, English courts recognizing crypto
assets as “property” means that they could be the subject of a proprietary
injunction.29 In B2C2 v Quoine,30 the court accept ed that Bitcoins could be
the subject of a trust, and so were property . Nonetheless, in New Zealand,
cryptocurrencies were regarded as “digital assets,” a form of property
capable of being held on trust.31 To that extent, A. Fowowe32 argues that
“While the US dollar has historically been the dominant
currency in international trade, alternative currencies like
cryptocurrencies and stablecoins are now more prevalent,
opening up new opportunities for individuals and
organisations to conduct cross-border transactions. However ,
using cryptocurrency also comes with legal dif ficulties, such
as the issue of jurisdiction, whether cryptocurrency can be
regarded as a property or being tangible under the Sale of
Goods Act.”
It is vital that recognizing the inner workings of monetary systems
generates valua ble insights into the function and stability of traditional
monetary systems33 and of the value of the alternatives offered by digital
networks such as Bitcoin34 and in general crypto-assets. Hence, monetary
exchange is more valuable at promoting cooperation than alternative
record-keeping systems. The important factor is not the type of money , but
rather the equality between units of money and the units of value in the
economy , which means that the value of money has to be equal  to the units
of value of the total worth of trade in an economy . If the exch ange rate is
not determined by the demand and supply of money and traded goods and
services, then instability produ ces problems in an economy . Price is the
variable reflecti ng the exchangeability of any item versus money. Money
has no role to play when individuals depend on shared knowledge of past
conduct to imitate patterns of monetary exchange.35 Bigoni et al.36 argue
that
“the dif ferences in long-run ef ficiency , strategies and
distribution of earnings in the Money and Memory treatments
demonstrate that money performs a richer set of functions than
just revealing past behaviors…the use of money imposes a
discipline on what agents are willing to do in order to keep the
economy on a cooperative track. Such findings suggest that
well-functioning monetary systems are not simply
rudimentary arrangements for monitoring past conduct in
society , but play a richer role than previously thought.”
The European economy rocketed  once it was freed from a restrained money
supply furthered  by the development of new markets, new technology , and
new payment systems that made possible long-distance commerce and
movements of capital possible. Governments produce money  themselves
much more efficiently in the age of paper currency and electronic benefit
transfers. Money is no longer tied to specie extraction.37
Finally , in the developed world, government fiscal activity is subject to
some degree of democratic accountability , and fiscal endeavor is a
manifestation of democratic politics.38 Governments are now much more
energetically involved in control over the private production of money .
Central banks now control the money supply by amending the price of
money through the setting of target interest rates. Money production has
become monetary policy , achieving the politically desired level s of growth,
employment, and inflation. Thus, market, governmental, and technological
changes signify that the effectiv eness of private money creation stemming
from fractional reserve banking is no longer so self-evident,  even if its
inherent instability is more and more obvious.
Banking law restricts entry into money augmentation.39 Morgan Ricks40
argues that
“private money often plays a central role in macroeconomic
disasters, at least those emanating from the financial sector .
The law of money encompasses the law of central banking…
the law of money must also address the interface between
public monetary institutions and private law .”
Banking regulat ion alters how capital is distributed both across sectors
within an economy and across jurisdictions, escalating competition among
governments that want to maximize national welfare.41