14 NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT WITH A/B
TESTING
14.1 Innovations in the Marketplace
14.2 New Product Development Stages
14.2.1  Idea Generation
14.2.2  Idea Screening
14.2.3  Concept Development and Testing
14.2.4  Business Analysis
14.2.5  Product Development and Design
14.2.6  Test Marketing
14.2.7  Commercialization
14.2.8  Evaluation and Control
14.3 The Importance of Testing and Market Research
14.3.1  For Design Evaluation
14.3.2  For Engaging Customers in an Omnichannel W orld
14.3.3  For Incorporating Feedback and Customer Experience
14.4 The Intricacies of A/B Testing
14.5 Using A/B Testing to Test Gaming Prototypes
14.5.1  Experimental Design
14.5.2  Analyzing the Data and Presenting the Results
14.5.3  F Test
14.5.4  Testing Statistical Dif ference
14.6 Using the A/B Test in New Product Development
14.6.1  Insights Derived From the A/B Test
14.7 Implementation Using R: The A/B Test
14.8 Understanding the Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Introduce new products in the marketplace
2. Recall the steps in the new product development process
3. Support new product development with machine learning
4. Use A/B testing for new product development
5. Introduce a digital product
14.1 INNOVATIONS IN THE MARKETPLACE
Chase introduced its new credit card, the Chase Sapphire Reserve, in 2016, which of fered users
100,000 sign-up bonus points for the first year and led to Chase exceeding its annual sales target in the
first few weeks. The enthusiasm with which millennials adopted the card because of the free points was
a key factor in its success. However , Chase needed to see beyond the first year of product introduction
to assess how the card would do in the next years after the promotional of fer expired and annual fees
kicked in. Despite high annual fees of $550, it is considered the best travel card around because of the
perks it of fers—including airport lounge access and application fee credit for Global Entry and TSA
PreCheck.1 This is one example of a product launch that was designed and launched well, and the right
strategies are helping Chase sustain its success.
Nintendo released the Switch in 2017, which sold 2.74 million units in the first month. Its design allowed
for handheld and console gaming that appealed to a broad user base. The launch titles, such as The
Legend of Zelda: Breath of the W ild, captured people’ s attention. The Switch was priced competitively ,
and its features such as local multiplayer gaming and portability helped it perform successfully in the
marketplace.
The concept of a product has evolved in the digital age. Technological advances in artificial intelligence,
cloud computing, 3D printing, and wireless sensor networks have now made it possible to build products
that do not have a physical presence but that live entirely on the web, such as health monitoring apps
on smartphones and facial recognition apps for fraud detection; even in automobiles much of the driving
is controlled by algorithms, such as with self-driving technology . Netflix is a good example of how
algorithmic power has been harnessed for new product of ferings. Netflix began algorithmic
recommendation as early as 2010. Gradually algorithms helped it decide which movies to show , how to
display them on screens, and which pictures should be used to advertise them. Today the company’ s
algorithms are not just used for providing recommendations to users; user interactions with the Netflix
platform inform the company , for example, what content to develop next and what type of show is likely
to garner the most viewership. As early as 2013, Netflix was using predictive analytics to determine what
type of new content needed to be included in its show House of Cards  to ensure a specific size of
viewership.
14.2 NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT STAGES
How can we define a new product? Is it something entirely new that customers have never seen before,
such as the microwave oven that was introduced as a substitute for the conventional gas/electric range?
Or is it a product that is merely an extension of an existing product, or a newer model with enhanced
features, such as a new version of the iPhone that has more memory or functionality than an earlier
version? New products get categorized broadly as breakthrough or incremental depending on whether
they completely disrupt the existing marketplace or of fer newer benefits to consumers. Breakthrough
innovations are relatively rare, accounting for less than 10% of all products that get introduced in the
marketplace. Many product launches are merely extensions of existing products or me-too products with
barely any innovation that are introduced at a lower cost. Moreover , the failure rate for new products is
quite high. Many ideas never culminate in a viable product. Even among those new products that do get
developed, more than 50% are not profitable. Before we see a product in the marketplace—be it a
biotechnology , pharmaceutical, automotive, or digital product—it has gone through a long process of
being designed and introduced. What are the steps in new product development? They commonly are
the following, with many of these steps being iterative. Next, we will go through the steps in the new
product development (NPD) process (see Figure 14.1 ) in the context of creating an entertaining game
with various levels of dif ficulty .
Description
Figure 14.1  New Product Development Process
14.2.1 Idea Generation
The first step of any project is idea generation (this is Step 1 in Figure 14.1 ). This can be a structured
process in some businesses where regular brainstorming involves discussing what consumers need and
what type of (as well as whether) new products can be developed. For instance, in some industries, new
models or brand extensions are an outcome of such a structured process. Alternatively , new product
ideas can emerge as a by-product or even accidentally while working on other projects. In the context of
game development, this step could involve generating ideas for a puzzle-adventure game in which
players travel dif ferent worlds where each world represents a unique level of dif ficulty . Such a game can
be developed in the realm of fantasy , science fiction, or history .
14.2.2 Idea Screening
The second step involves the rigorous evaluation of product ideas with each idea undergoing a
comprehensive assessment to determine its viability , innovation, and market appeal.
Viability:  This considers whether the idea is technically feasible and economically sustainable,
ensuring that the product can be developed as well as marketed successfully .
Innovation:  An important criterion is to determine the product idea’ s uniqueness or substantial
improvement over existing products. It ensures that the product features are indeed novel to the
market.
Market Appeal:  The idea is evaluated for its potential attractiveness to the intended target segment,
determining whether it meets customer needs and preferences ef fectively .
The aim of this step is to filter and retain only those ideas that show potential for success.
For game development, after careful consideration, the idea of a multilevel, puzzle-adventure game
rooted in medieval history was chosen for its engaging concept and scalability .
14.2.3 Concept Development and Testing
In this step, the ideas start to take shape. W e can think of it like a sketch turning into a detailed
blueprint. The designers start defining the product’ s features, how the product functions, and what
makes it unique. It is possible that more than one version of the product is built to find the best-
performing one. This could involve the shape, size, or weight of a physical product or the seamless
connectivity of a digital product. At this step the designers may use surveys or focus groups to test the
product with potential users. Consumers’  feedback is helpful in tweaking the product, making sure it is
something people will find valuable.
For the puzzle-adventure game, detailed features such as the game rules, objectives, and varying levels
of dif ficulty are established at this step, ensuring that the game is well structured, engaging, immersive,
and challenging. To ensure that the developed concept aligns with user expectations and preferences,
testing can also be conducted with users in this step.
14.2.4 Business Analysis
The aim of this step is to figure out the business or market viability of the developed concepts. Dif ferent
types of comprehensive business analysis such as cost estimation, sales projections, and profitability
analysis are conducted to assess the potential business impact and commercial success of the new
product.
For game development, this step will involve analyzing the costs associated with developing the game,
the product price, and estimating potential revenues based on market research.
14.2.5 Product Development and Design
In this step, the developed concepts are further developed into tangible products. The product design is
finalized, incorporating all the necessary features and functionalities, ensuring it’ s user-friendly and
aesthetically appealing. Prototypes or samples are developed, getting the product ready for market
introduction.
This step for our game development example would involve probably programming the game
mechanics, designing unique worlds for each dif ficulty level, and ensuring that the user interface is
intuitive and engaging.
14.2.6 Test Marketing
Before the product is launched in the market, it is tested in select markets to obtain user reactions to
both design and cost. W e can think of this to be a dress rehearsal before the main performance, in
which a select audience is invited to provide their review of the performance. This allows for any last-
minute adjustments or improvements. The arrow pointing back from Step 6 to Step 5 in Figure 14.1
indicates the possibility of such feedback. Any necessary corrections can be made at this stage based
on test market results.
Step 6 for game launch could include the game being soft-launched in select markets or platforms to
gather user feedback, analyze gameplay data, and make any needed improvements.
14.2.7 Commercialization
After adjustments or improvements are included in the product following the test marketing step, the
product is of ficially launched in the market. In this step, several marketing strategies are deployed,
aiming for a successful launch and a wide market adoption.
When the game is launched in the market, it is likely to involve launching the fully optimized puzzle-
adventure game globally , implementing a comprehensive marketing strategy to maximize visibility and
downloads.
14.2.8 Evaluation and Control
The new product development process does not conclude after the product launch. The business will
closely monitor the product’ s market performance. This step involves evaluating the product’ s success
against the company’ s expectations regarding sales as well as customer reviews. It could also include
assessment of how well the product performs in comparison to any other competitor that was introduced
in the market.
For the game, its performance is continuously monitored postlaunch, and updates are made to improve
the game, fix bugs, and keep the content fresh and engaging based on user feedback and evolving
gaming trends.
14.3 THE IMPORTANCE OF TESTING AND MARKET RESEARCH
As we just learned through the dif ferent processes of ideating, designing, and launching a new product,
the role of continuously getting feedback from potential users is very important since the process can
include many uncertainties. This includes how consumers and competitors will react; if any external
factors in the economic or social environment will change before, during, or immediately after the
launch; what the price of the product should be; through which channel the product should be launched;
and how the product should be promoted. Even before launching a new product in the market, the
manager needs to weigh the cost of designing the new product: Will the design be financially viable?
How long will it take to move from design, to production, to launch stage? What does the company have
to give up to invest in this new product? In order to answer these questions and reduce some of the
uncertainty , companies sometimes conduct surveys to find out which features of the product or launch
environment result in greater acceptance by consumers.
14.3.1 For Design Evaluation
Whether the product is digital or physical, it is important to incorporate user experience and feedback
into the product during the design stage. A commonly used method to gather user feedback is through
A/B testing to find out which product design will attract the most interest. For instance, for digital
products like apps that people view online, click rate is used to determine interest (and eventual
purchase). As we discussed in Chapter 7 , a multi-armed-bandit-based algorithm is now being deployed
by large firms to determine quickly which combination of product features will result in the highest
interest and purchase.
14.3.2 For Engaging Customers in an Omnichannel World
When the product is ready for launch, algorithms again are used to determine the best way to engage
customers in today’ s omnichannel world. This has both benefits and shortcomings. Traditionally , people
gained product information through one channel such as television or in- store behavior . Today ,
however , people can be reached through multiple interconnected channels, which makes the task
challenging because businesses need to find the optimal channels as well as to customize the message
depending on the channel. Hence, a one-message/one-channel policy may not be successful.
14.3.3 For Incorporating Feedback and Customer Experience
Just as user feedback is gathered during the design stage, once the new product is launched it again
becomes essential to find out how customers are reacting to it. In the design stage, the feedback is
probably gathered from a smaller sample of people, while in the postlaunch stage, a larger set of
customers can be reached to find out what they like (or don’t like) about the product. This feedback now
happens on an ongoing basis, building a continuous chain from users to designers and back.
14.4 THE INTRICACIES OF A/B TESTING
As we discussed in Chapter 7  on advertising, there are several steps that need to be followed to
develop a sound A/B test. This includes ensuring that the experimental design is causal (an A/B test is
really another name for causal experimentation) and not correlational. For this, we need to ensure that
we are keeping all features of the A/B test constant and only varying the feature(s) whose influence we
want to examine. Second, we need to create groups (also called conditions or treatments) that vary
different levels of the feature that we want to examine. Finally , we should be careful that participants are
randomly assigned  to the various groups and that there is no issue of self-selection. What exactly is self-
