for the product to arrive from the manufacturer to a retailer can also be low or high. The outcome
variable is whether the product was backordered ( yes or no). Our goal is to come up with a simple
prediction model that tells us if a product will be backordered based on its forecasted sales and transit
time. The data are presented in Table 12.1 .
Forecasted sales Transit time Backordered
Low Low No
High Low Yes
Low Low No
High High Yes
Low Low Yes
High High No
High Low Yes
Low High No
High High Yes
The first challenge in building a classification tree is to choose a variable that first splits the root node.
Let’s consider Figure 12.3 . The dark circles represent when the product was backordered, and the light
circles represent when it was not backordered. W e see that the variable of forecasted sales performs
better at classifying whether a product was backordered. In the low-forecast group, three out of the
four data points are not backordered, and in the high-forecast group, four out of the five data points are
backordered. In an intuitive way , high- and low-forecast groups are able to segregate backordered and
not-backordered data points more ef fectively than high- and low-transit-time groups. But this is just a
visual assessment. How can we quantify which variable is a better classifier? Gini impurity provides us
with one way to do this. Each predictor variable at each level is 1 – (fraction of backordered = “Y es”
datapoints)2 − (fraction of backordered = “No”  datapoints)2. Lower values of Gini impurity are preferred
over higher values. Let’ s understand how to calculate the Gini index for the example we are working
with.
Description
Figure 12.3  Gini Index Calculation
For forecasted sales as shown in Figure 12.3 , we have five data points with high-forecast sales and
four data points with low-forecast sales. Among the five data points in the high-forecast group, four are
for backorders, and one is not. The fraction of items backordered in this group is 4
5, and the fraction of
items not backordered is 1
5. The Gini impurity for this group is 1−(4
5)2
−(1
5)2=0.32. Among
the four data points in the low-forecast group, one was backordered, and three were not. The fraction
of items backordered in this group is 1
4, and the fraction of items not backordered is 3
4. The Gini
impurity for this group is 1−(1
4)2
−(3
4)2
=0.375. Now we can calculate Gini weighted
impurity for forecasted sales. Since there are nine data points, the weighted Gini impurity for the low-
forecast group will be 5
9, and for the high-forecast group it will be 4
9. The weighted average will be
(5
9)0.32+(4
9)0.375=0.34.
Similarly , we can calculate weighted Gini impurity for the transit time variable (as depicted in Figure
12.4).
Description
Figure 12.4  Gini Impurity for Forecasted Sales and Transit Time
We find that Gini impurity is lower with forecasted sales; hence, it becomes the variable to split the root
node. The resulting decision tree will look like Figure 12.5 , in which it splits further based on the transit
time.
Description
Figure 12.5  Decision Tree Splits
Since we have only two predictor variables, this will not be split further , and the final nodes will be the
terminal nodes or leaves. Predictions associated with each leaf will reflect the majority class. As an
example, if the majority class in the leftmost leaf is no (2) and the minority class is yes (1), then the
prediction associated with this leaf will be no.
12.4.3 Advantages, Disadvantages, and Ways to Improve
Classification Trees
Classification trees of fer many advantages. First, several types of predictor variables (numeric or
categorical in nature) can be included in the analysis, and they don’t need to be scaled or
standardized. Second, outliers don’t influence classification tree predictions; therefore, no outlier
removal is necessary before analysis. Third, trees are not af fected by the presence of irrelevant
predictors. If an irrelevant predictor is included in the analysis, the analysis is not af fected even when
the user is uncertain which predictors have a significant influence. Classification trees can also handle
the presence of correlated predictors (multicollinearity), which is very common in real-world data since
many of the predictors that users might identify as being important for the analysis could be correlated
with one another . Fourth, interactions among predictor variables are automatically incorporated in the
analysis; therefore, there is no need to prespecify interactions, which is necessary in methods such as
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression and logistic regression.
However , there are some disadvantages  of using classification trees. Individual trees do not have as
much predictive power as many other methods such as logistic regression or neural nets. Trees are
also very sensitive to variations in the training data. In other words, if we divide the training data
randomly into two parts and train two dif ferent trees, then there is a high likelihood that both trees will
fail to make similar predictions.
One way to improve the predictive power of trees and reduce their sensitivity to variations in the
training data is to combine the predictions of many trees. The intuition behind combining various trees
can be understood through the example of measuring temperature. Imagine we have a thermometer
that has some random error . Every time we measure temperature, it gives slightly dif ferent readings.
One way to obtain a more stable and reliable estimate of temperature is to take several measurements
of temperature and then average them. In a similar vein, when we combine predictions of various
trees, we reduce variation in their predictions and improve their predictive power . The combination of
several trees is known as an ensemble of trees; since an ensemble of trees is a forest, the method that
creates this ensemble is called random forest.
12.5 RANDOM FOREST
The first step builds multiple distinct trees by using bootstrap samples of training data. Bootstrapping  is
a process of sampling data points from the original dataset with replacement. Imagine we have 30
balls in a box and each of them has a distinct number written on it. In sampling with replacement, we
first randomly pick a ball, write down the number written on the ball, and put it back in the box. W e
again pick a ball, write down the number , and put it back in the box. W e are allowed to randomly pick
the same ball more than once. Repeating this process 30 times will give us our first bootstrap sample.
For a dataset, bootstrap samples are formed by sampling rows with replacement from the original
dataset. Since we are replacing each row , there is a possibility that some rows will be picked up more
than once, that our bootstrap sample will have duplicate rows of data, and that some rows from the
original dataset will be missing in our bootstrap sample. This is exactly what we want because this will
help us build diverse trees. This process of building trees from several bootstrap samples and
combining their prediction is called bagging  (short for bootstrap aggregation ).
In a regular decision tree, all the predictor variables are considered at each split; however , this leads to
a problem. If there is a predictor variable that is very good at predicting the outcome variable, then
regardless of how many bootstrap samples we use, there is a very high chance that all the trees will
look the same and their predictions will be very correlated. In other words, we will fail to build diverse
trees. The second step of random forest, therefore, goes beyond simple bagging. It combines bagging
with an idea known as subspace sampling  (also referred to as feature bagging ). At each split, it
randomly selects a subset of predictor variables that are the only ones considered; then a new subset
of predictors is considered at the next split from the remaining predictors. So if there are 20 predictor
variables, then 5 are randomly chosen at each split. Their performance on a criterion like Gini impurity
is compared, and the best-performing variable splits the data. At the next split, a new random sample
of 5 predictors from the remaining set of 19 predictors is chosen. This method ensures that if a strong
predictor exists, then it is not always chosen to split the data. This way , we get diverse trees from
bootstrap samples.
In the third step of random forest, each tree makes its prediction, and the final prediction is based on
the consensus value. The outcome that receives the most votes is the final prediction. As an example,
if we build 100 trees for a new product where the outcome is unknown, and out of these 100 trees 65
trees predict that the product will be backordered and 35 predict that the product will not be
backordered, then the final prediction of the random forest will be yes.
As can be noticed, we have not discussed any method to find the optimum number of predictor
variables randomly sampled in the second step. There is no way to estimate the optimum number from
the dataset. Therefore, this becomes a hyperparameter that needs to be tuned using cross-validation.
Another hyperparameter is the number of trees we want to grow . This also needs to be tuned using
cross-validation.
12.6 BACKORDER PREDICTION USING RANDOM FORESTS
Let’s assume that a manufacturer of small machines has set up an inventory system to ensure that it
can keep track of obtaining machined parts from its suppliers so it can build its machines and deliver
them on time to its customers. However , recently , the manufacturer has noticed some backorder
issues, leading to dissatisfied customers. To prevent such backorder issues from occurring in the
future, the manufacturer uses random forests to build a model for predicting (and hence addressing)
backorders. Let’ s understand the process and perform the analysis ourselves. W e will refer to the
business as the manufacturer , and the machines it manufactures as products.
12.6.1 Data Import and Selection
The variables in our analysis include the following.5 The outcome variable indicated whether a product
was backordered ( yes vs. no). The random forest was provided with 16 predictor variables such as the
current level of inventory; usual and current transit time; sales forecasts for the next 3, 6, and 9
months; sales in the past 3, 6, and 9 months; minimum recommended stock; and machined parts due
from the manufacturer ’s suppliers.
We begin our analysis by importing the data and checking the class of nonnumeric variables. W e want
to ensure that nonnumeric or categorical variables are recognized as factors in the analysis.
As we discussed earlier , backorder data tend to have a class imbalance, where the number of items
that were backordered is proportionately less than the number of items that were not backordered.
Let’s check this in our data through a simple plot ( Figure 12.6 ).
Figure 12.6  Data Imbalance
The plot shows that products that were backordered (i.e., when the outcome variable was yes)
represented approximately 1
5 of the data. This makes the times the product was not backordered (i.e.,
when the outcome variable was no) a majority level (also referred to as majority class). Yes becomes a
minority level. It is necessary to use a sampling method that provides an appropriate representation to
the minority level. Next we discuss one such sampling method.
12.6.2 Imbalance in the Data
To handle the issue of class imbalance, we use a downsampling method that samples rows from the
training data in such a way that the majority level (when the products were not backordered—i.e.,
when outcome variable = no) is sampled less. This increases the proportion of the minority level (when
the products were backordered) in model training. W e set the train data in such a way that the
backorders are at most 1.5 times as many rows as minority levels. If we compare this situation to our
base situation when no sampling is applied, we will have majority levels with 4 times as many rows as
minority levels.
However , having corrected for the imbalance in the training data so that the model has enough data
points from which to learn how backorders are af fected by the predictors, we need to ensure that the
model is tested on a dataset that captures the real world. The real world has a data imbalance, where
backorders are fewer in number; therefore, we need to have test data that reflect this smaller number
of backorders compared to all orders so that the ef ficacy of the model in the real world can be tested.
Thus, in the test data, no undersampling is used, and the imbalance is retained.
12.6.3 Hyperparameter Tuning
We formulate the model with backorder as the outcome variable and all other variables as predictors.
We then specify the random forest algorithm and also the hyperparameters—such as the number of
predictors randomly sampled at each split when a tree is created, the number of trees contained in a
random forest, and the minimum number of data points in a node required for the node to be split
further (please see the Technical Appendix for a detailed description of hyperparameters). Each
hyperparameter is then tuned through a grid search. Since our outcome variable is categorical ( yes
and no), we need to ensure that our model type is specified as a classification model.
We use fivefold cross-validation, indicating that there will be five partitions of the training dataset and
that the performance of each hyperparameter combination will be assessed using this cross-validation
procedure. Moreover , we specify 50 dif ferent hyperparameter combinations. For each of the 50
hyperparameter combinations, a model is fit on the four partitions, and its performance is assessed on
the fifth partition. The AUC ROC (area under the curve receiver operating characteristics) curve and
overall accuracy of the model are computed (please refer to Chapter 9  on logistic regression, which
provides a detailed description of interpreting AUC ROC values for a model).
We then pick the best hyperparameter combination.
The analysis reveals that the best hyperparameter combinations are the following: the number of
predictors randomly sampled at each split when a tree is created = 5, the number of trees contained in
a random forest = 69, and the minimum number of data points in a node that is required for the node to
be split further = 31.
12.6.4 Testing the Performance of Our Random Forest Model
We fit the model using the best hyperparameter combination on the entire training set and then
validate its performance on the test data. The accuracy and ROC values ( Table 12.2 ), along with the
confusion matrix for the test data ( Table 12.3 ), are reported.
12.6.4.1  Accuracy and ROC V alues
.metric .estimator .estimate .config
accuracy binary 0.8223553 Preprocessor1_Model1
roc_auc binary 0.9076335 Preprocessor1_Model1
 No Yes
No 329 16
Yes73 83
The results show that the accuracy is 82.2%, and the AUC is 0.908. Given the imbalance in levels of
