The results of these control tests indicate that if the 2024 bad debt percentage for this age 
group was used in 2025, it may not accurately measure the bad debts expected in the 2025 
accounts receivable balance. These visualizations show that implementing controls, such as 
data reasonableness tests, before performing an analysis can result in better business and pro-
fessional intelligence.
Steps 4 and 5: Analysis Strategy Risks and Controls
Common analysis risks include errors in data manipulation, calculation, or using technology, 
as well as human biases and ethical violations when using sensitive data. Here are some exam-
ples of analyses risks when estimating bad debts: 
•	Errors in age group categorization and age total calculations.
•	Incorrect application of bad debt estimation percentages to age group totals.
•	Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts across age groups.
•	Mistakes in the calculation of the value to use for bad debts expense.
Verifying the accuracy of the age group categorizations and each sum and multiplication per-
formed on age group data items and totals would control for these risks.
Another control is to use common sense when reviewing the results for reasonableness. 
Illustration 4.6 uses an example from the 30–60 days age group estimation to show how a 
common sense check helps catch large errors. The total outstanding accounts receivable for 
that age group was $ 20,441.46, and the uncollectible percentage for that group was 2%. The 

4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-9
estimated uncollectible value for that age group was calculated as the product of those two 
numbers, resulting in $ 408.83. This control has verified our calculation.
ILLUSTRATION 4.6  Common 
Sense Check for the 30–60 Days 
Group Results
Common Sense
Step 1
2% is 1/5th of 10%
10% is easy to
calculate!
Now, just divide this
by 5 to get the 2% amount.
Results for this age group
were $408.83. We can be
confident in our result.
Common Sense
Step 2
10% of $20,441 = $2,044
Common Sense
Step 3
$2,044 divided by 5 = $409 
Analysis results that significantly vary from common sense checks should be verified.
The project plan design for this example is now complete (Illustration 4.7).
ILLUSTRATION 4.7  Complete Project Plan for Estimating Bad Debts
3
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
2 Data Strategy
The following data should be used in the analysis:
• Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
• Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
• Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 day, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30–60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from allowance for uncollectible accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
      for the adjusting entry value.
4
• Errors in age group categorization and
   calculations.
 • Erroneous application of bad debt estimation
   percentages to age group totals.
 • Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts
   across age groups.
 • Errors in the calculation of the value to use for
   bad debts expense.
Data Strategy Risks
• Data errors (missing data, due date errors, invoice
   total errors).
• Data extraction errors.
• Inaccurate management assumptions and
   estimates (bad debt percentages).
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
• Verify all classifications and groupings.
 • Verify all calculations.
 • Verify correct use of analysis technologies.
 
Data Strategy Controls
• Compare extracted data to source documentation.
• Compare to prior period to verify management
   estimates and assumptions.
• Review customer, policy and procedure changes.
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
This total
answers the first
project plan question
This result
answers the second
project plan question

4-10  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Next, we go into more depth about how to develop both data and analysis strategies.
Apply It 4.1
Build a Project Plan 
for Inventory Costs
Financial Accounting   Founded by Elisabeth Hess and based in Wisconsin, Tremendous Toys 
produces and sells unique ­animal-form toys online. The company has over a million dollars in sales 
revenues and a strong national and international following. The investment bank underwriting its 
upcoming initial public offering requires that Elisabeth produce a U.S. GAAP valuation of year-end 
inventory.
Elisabeth has kept meticulous records, organized in business cost categories, which are listed 
here. She knows which materials were used to create each toy, which employee built it, and how 
long each took to create. She has also recorded the number and type of toys produced every month. 
­However, she has never assigned costs to her inventory items.
Materials
Labor
Overhead
Plastic for 3D 
printers
Production workers’ time
3D printer costs
Wood
Production workers’ pay rate
Production tools costs
Resin
Computer (peripherals and internet) 
costs
Fiber and fabric
Shipping costs
Paints, varnishes, 
and dyes
Factory rent, utilities, and storage
Toy clothing
Production supplies
Glues and epoxies
Tax and legal fees
Bling and other 
accessories
Donations to charities
Eyes and body parts
Advertising costs
Prepare a data analysis project plan to help Elisabeth develop her inventoriable costs. Use the follow-
ing structure for your answer.
	 1.	Project objective and specific question
	 2.	Data strategy
	 3.	Analysis strategy
	 4.	Data and analysis strategy risks
	 5.	Data and analysis strategy controls
SOLUTION
	 1.	Project objective
	
	 Specific question
Prepare a U.S. GAAP compliant full costing valuation for 
Tremendous Toys’ current inventory.
What is the U.S. GAAP year-end value of inventory?
	 2.	Data strategy
•	 Collect all costs and raw measures of consumption of 
resources related to production (direct materials, direct 
labor, and manufacturing overhead costs) for the last 
three years.
•	 Collect records of how many units were produced for each 
month of cost data received.
•	 Take a physical count of the current inventory by product.
(Continued)

4.2  What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis?  4-11
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 Aggregate cost data by monthly production of figurines.
•	 Estimate cost behavior using regression to find variable 
costs per figurine and total fixed production costs per 
month.
•	 Apply results to year-end inventory.
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 Missing data.
•	 Including personal expenses.
•	 Material costs and worker costs may not be representa-
tive of true replacement costs of future material and labor 
costs.
•	 Potential bias for minimizing cost information to make 
business seem more profitable.
•	 Averaging costs across figurines may not be accurate if 
true costs of different figurines vary significantly.
•	 Regression may not have strong explanatory power 
(R-square).
•	 Costs may have seasonality differences (due to scarcity of 
materials or heating and cooling costs).
•	 Cost formula may need to be recalculated annually to cap-
ture cost changes.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Interview Elisabeth with a typical list of inventory costs to 
catch omitted costs.
•	 Inquire about the seasonal or economic trends of mate-
rials, labor and production overhead costs, and use the 
average of the highest and lowest points.
•	 Use median tendencies rather than means.
•	 Run sensitivity models with future replacement cost val-
ues to note potential risk in final product cost estimations 
and possible data bias.
4.2  What Should We Consider When 
Selecting Data for Analysis?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ❷
Describe how to develop a data strategy.
It’s easier to make better decisions when we have the necessary information. Each semester, 
students who know their educational and career goals can select the courses that will prepare 
them to graduate and begin their careers. For example, accounting majors do not need to take 
the same courses as education majors. The same idea applies when developing a strategy for 
selecting data in data analysis. A successful data analysis project hinges on selecting data that 
are relevant and appropriate for the objective of the project, respecting the data’s characteris-
tics and measurement scales, and controlling for inherent data risks.

4-12  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Identify Appropriate Data
Data can be considered appropriate for analysis when they are relevant, available, and the 
characteristics match the analysis method requirements. Appropriate data can be internal, 
external, or a combination of both:
•	Internal data are generated within the organization, such as sales data, purchase data, 
inventory data, customer data, and vendor data. Internal data can typically be more easily 
controlled and verified by an organization.
•	External data are obtained from sources outside of an organization. This data can include 
weather data, geographic data, and publicly available competitor data. External data are 
somewhat riskier to use since we often cannot know if the data are accurate or complete. 
External data can, however, provide insights that internal data alone cannot provide.
After identifying the available and relevant data alternatives, the characteristics of the possible 
data sets need to be verified as suitable for the planned analysis.
Evaluate Data Fields and Sources
A data set is a collection of data columns and rows available for analysis. Understanding the 
characteristics of a data set is important because, for example, statistical measures and tests 
often require certain data characteristics or a minimum of data points. Violating the data 
requirements for these measures and tests can threaten the accuracy, reliability, and signifi-
cance of the analysis results.
Let’s use an example to evaluate the impact data can have on analysis. Illustration 4.8 
shows the inventory data set for the 3D manufacturing company WeMakeIt, Inc.
ILLUSTRATION 4.8  Typical Elements in a Data Set from WeMakeIt, Inc.’s Inventory
358500
358600
358900
359000
361100
361200
361300
361400
3
3
3
3
$  36.00
$  36.00
$  36.00
$  36.00
30
35
25
30
Medical model foot
Medical model hand
Shop Lamp globe
Superhero Fantastic Four Mister Fantastic
Superhero Fantastic Four Invisible Woman
Superhero Fantastic Four Thing
Superhero Fantastic Four Human Touch
Cord wraps
InventoryCode InventoryDescription
1
1
2
2
$  30.40
$  30.20
$  20.05
$    5.00
ProductCategory UnitCost
32
16
43
80
NumberOnHand
The data set is the entire collection
of rows and columns.
Row = Record
Column = Data field = Attribute
The individual columns in a data set are called fields, and if the source of the data was a data-
base, the columns are called attributes. Each column describes and represents one unique 
characteristic, a description, or aspect of the phenomena captured in the data set. Rows in 
a data set from a database are records, which represent the collection of columns that hold 
the descriptions of a single occurrence of the data set’s purpose. In Illustration 4.8, the high-
lighted row ­contains all the information about the inventory item Superhero Fantastic Four 
Mister Fantastic–inventory code, the description, product category, unit cost, and the number 
of items on hand. This inventory item belongs to the ProductCategory group #3, indicating 
that it is a superhero figurine.
The records, or rows, in this inventory data set represent the different products man-
ufactured in each product line. The columns that describe each inventory product for the 
WeMakeIt, Inc. inventory data set are listed in Illustration 4.9.

4.2  What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis?  4-13
ILLUSTRATION 4.9  Data Dictionary for the WeMakeIt, Inc. Inventory Data Set
InventoryCode
InventoryDescription
ProductCategory
UnitCost
NumberOnHand
Unique numerical code to identify inventory (primary key)
Text that describes the inventory product
The type of product (1 = medical, 2 = tool, 3 = toy)
Currency value assigned to each unit’s cost
Quantity of items in inventory
Description
Field Name
In addition to understanding the content of data fields in accounting databases, considering 
the source of the data is important because the quality of the data in the fields impact the qual-
ity of the analysis. Were the data created by an external party on a web page, entered internally 
by an employee, or automatically assigned by the computer? Do the data refer to a category, a 
measurement, or a calculation? For example, in the WeMakeIt, Inc. inventory data in Illustra-
tion 4.9, the InventoryCode field’s data are probably automatic sequential numbers assigned 
by the AIS system whenever a new inventory product is added. Since a human is not creating 
that field’s value when a new row is added, we can be confident that the InventoryCode data 
are consistently correct. Illustration 4.10 summarizes the typical internal data field sources 
often used by accountants.
ILLUSTRATION 4.10  Common Data Field Sources and Examples
Source
Description
WeMakeIt Inc. Examples
Raw Data Fields
Measured 
Raw Data
•	 Data created or captured by a controlled 
process capturing the value of the data. 
Examples include price, cost, number 
on hand, weight, date, hours worked, 
temperature, sensor readings, human 
observation, or economic value.
•	 Their format can be discrete or continuous 
data.
InventoryCost
NumberOnHand
UnitCost
Non-
measured 
Raw Data
•	 Data often created automatically by the 
computer or company policy for control. 
Examples include identification codes, chart 
of account numbers, standard descriptions, 
product category codes, or location codes such 
as city.
•	 These fields are typically formatted as discrete 
data.
InventoryCode
ProductCategory
Calculated Data Fields
Calculated 
Data
•	 Data created when one or more fields in a 
particular record (row) have any number of 
mathematical operators (such as +, −, ×, %) 
applied, and often are derived from using the 
data in another field or fields within the same 
record (never across different rows).
•	 These fields can be formatted as discrete or 
continuous data.
TotalCost  
(=UnitCost × NumberOnHand)
In the WeMakeIt, Inc. data set example, both the InventoryCode and ProductCategory fields’ 
