Fantazzini and Yufeng Xiao154 argue that detecting pump-and-dumps in real
time implicates high-dimensional data, which means that AAI technology is
the answer to any “pump-and-dump” scheme by detecting the anomalies via
the speedy analysis of data and so prohibiting any insider trading from
taking place.

It is worth noting that crypto asset trading is subject to laws combating
money laundering, illegal imports, terrorist financing, and tax evasion; thus,
leading digital platform operators in the United States and abroad have
acceded to regulation as money transmission services.155 John M. Griffin
and Kevin Mei156 reveal that
“the “legitimate” crypto space commonly serves as the entry
and exit point to the illegitimate space and in so is facilitating
the cheap and easy flow of funds that is the lifeblood enabling
both pig butchering and modern-day slavery. Overall, our
findings suggest that criminal networks are moving substantial
funds cheaply and without much fear of detection”.
It is characteristic that Bittrex, Coinbase, and Binance, among the leading
crypto exchanges in the world, found themselves charged with functioning
as unregistered securities intermediaries in the United States, and the SEC
assumed jurisdiction over a broad range of crypto asset platforms under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which means regulating crypto asset
platforms and public trading in crypto assets.157 The extensibility of digital
ledger technology gives crypto asset platforms the potential to disrupt
financial services. Moreover, crypto asset trading creates risks to the
financial stability of the broader marketplace, which means that there is a
need for proactively neutralizing new technologies’ possibly destabilizing
systemic consequences. Otherwise, there will be a need of backing up an
uncontrollable and indefensibly self-referential financial system.158
2.11 Crypto Market Developments
It is characteristic that progress in digital technology for financial services
has led to growth in markets for digital assets, with overwhelming effects
on the protection of consumers, investors, and businesses, embracing data
privacy and security, financial stability, systemic risk, and digital tokens.
Moreover, the likelihood of switching from traditional markets to the crypto
market has augmented systemic risk; thus, informed investors begin
increasing investments in the market, trapping uninformed investors into

the market and then dropping the price by cutting off demand. In other
words, the crypto market functions as a shadow system of traditional
markets, and so not regulating the crypto market means that the risk will
merely travel from the regulated market to the unregulated one.
Originally, governments embraced a laissez-faire approach, leaving the
crypto market unregulated and thus having to deal with the consequences of
unregulated 
decentralized 
finance 
(DeFi), 
which 
is 
based 
on
cryptocurrencies.159 H. Y. Jabotinsky and R. Sarel160 argue that “empirical
analysis reveals an interesting pattern: investors initially shifted funds to the
crypto market when the pandemic erupted, but then made a U-turn and
diverted funds out of cryptocurrencies, leading to a plunge in the market.”
For the reason that many cryptocurrencies behave as securities, the SEC
began enforcing the usual securities regulations regarding disclosure on
some existing tokens.161 An incorrect interpretation of a token’s current
price is possible if investors rely on incomplete or false data, and so,
herding increases systemic risk, which means that price bubbles arise and,
simultaneously, bubbles are bursting when people herd in the opposite
direction.162 Thus, herding in the crypto market is expected as long as much
of the relevant information required for correct pricing is dispersed. It has to
be taken into consideration that the crypto market will either lessen
systemic risk by granting investors an alternative during a crisis or
exaggerate the problem through spillovers to other markets.
AI agents, by being autonomous software entities capable of adjusting,
learning, and accomplishing multi-step functions, are restructuring
economic formations and governance in decentralized settings. In addition,
AI agents are altering how machines interact with their environments and
execute missions autonomously, and so, their undertakings are extending
from simple rule-based systems to high-tech entities powered by LLMs. To
that extent, the current evolution in LLMs has inspired the design and
functionality of AI agents.163 The market for AI agents in the crypto
economy is just arising; therefore, monetary values and monetary policy of
states will be tested first in a global environment and later on the AAI
society will give another substance to monetary value in a purely AI
economy.

