12 MANAGING DECISION UNCERTAINTY USING
RANDOM FORESTS
12.1 Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
12.2 Features of Decision Uncertainty
12.3 Backorder and Its Implications
12.4 Machine-Learning Options to Aid in Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
12.4.1  Components of a Decision Tree Model
12.4.2  Classification Trees
12.4.3  Advantages, Disadvantages, and W ays to Improve Classification Trees
12.5 Random Forest
12.6 Backorder Prediction Using Random Forests
12.6.1  Data Import and Selection
12.6.2  Imbalance in the Data
12.6.3  Hyperparameter Tuning
12.6.4  Testing the Performance of Our Random Forest Model
12.6.4.1  Accuracy and ROC V alues
12.6.4.2  Confusion Matrix, Sensitivity , and Specificity
12.6.4.3  Role of Downsampling
12.7 Business Insights and Summary
12.8 Implementation Using R: Backorder Prediction
12.9 Understanding the Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the importance of ef ficient business decisions, anticipating demand
2. Learn decision-making under uncertainty
3. Apply decision tree models to predict uncertain decisions
4. Review the advantages and limitations of tree models
5. Employ boosted decision trees to predict stocking decisions
12.1 DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Decision-making under uncertainty has been studied as a continuum of decisions that are made when
information is missing or is available only in probabilistic form (e.g., the likelihood of success is 80%).1
Consider the following two scenarios that highlight the inherent uncertainty in business decision-
making.
In the first scenario, a major airline, considered a dominant player at one of its hub airports, is faced
with a new challenge: the entry of a low-cost, no-frills competitor . It has to decide whether to react to
the new entrant (action) or not do anything (inaction). Both decisions carry inherent uncertainties. If it
decides to take an action and reduce price, there are several uncertain outcomes. First, will a price
reduction deter customers from flocking to the new entrant? Second, will it actually increase market
share, or will it erode profits? Third, will the price drop strengthen its brand image, or will it be seen as
a sign of weakness? Fourth, actions like price reductions can sometimes lead to price wars, which
might hurt the industry as a whole. Alternatively , the airline can maintain the status quo, but this
inaction has its own uncertainties. First, how many existing customers might be persuaded away by
the competitor ’s lower prices or novel of ferings. Second, staying the course might be perceived by
stockholders as either a confident move, showcasing the brand’ s strength, or indicating an
unwillingness to adapt to changing market dynamics. Third, by not adjusting to the changing market
dynamics, there’ s a potential loss of opportunities that the new entrant might exploit. Fourth, will the
business be able to recover its position if it realizes too late that a response was necessary?
In the second scenario, an electronics retailer is preparing to stock a new smartphone. Due to supply
chain issues from the manufacturer , the retailer learns that they will receive only half of the originally
ordered units triggering the following decision dilemma: Should the retailer accept backorders, allowing
customers to reserve now and receive the product later when more stock arrives, or should they sell
only the available stock and potentially lose sales to competitors? Both decisions have their inherent
uncertainties.
First, it is unclear how many customers will prefer immediate purchase compared to those willing to
wait for a backordered item. Second, of fering backorders might be seen as a service, but extended
wait times can negatively af fect customer satisfaction, leading to refunds and poor customer reviews.
Third, if the timeline for additional shipments from the manufacturer is not clear , it adds to the
uncertainty . A short delay may be acceptable to customers, but longer ones can af fect sales and
customer trust. Fourth, information (or lack of information) about the stock availability at competitor
outlets can add to the uncertainty . If competitors also do not have suf ficient stock, not of fering
backorders might result in lost sales.
These scenarios highlight business decisions with inherent uncertainty . Other decisions fraught with
uncertainty include, for instance, (1) deciding between of fering price discounts to encourage growth or
increasing prices to increase profitability , (2) decisions about allocating resources to retain current
customers versus recruit new ones, (3) whether to invest in an immediate profitable venture or focus
on long-term projects that might yield larger returns later , or (4) projecting the impact of weather and
other natural events on the supply chain that can disrupt transportation, delay deliveries, and af fect
raw material availability .
12.2 FEATURES OF DECISION UNCERTAINTY
Uncertain decisions have several important features that need to be considered.2 First, what is the
value in taking a decision under uncertainty versus gathering more information before proceeding?
Let’s take the example of a pharmaceutical company that is performing drug trials for a new cancer
treatment. It will use randomized controlled trials (RCT s) to control for all factors and find the influence
of the focal drug on cancer treatment; this is generally referred to as internal validity . However , the
uncertainty that the company has to face is how the drug will fare when patients with dif ferent
comorbidities, of dif ferent races, or with any other characteristics that makes them respond to the drug
differently , actually take the drug after it has been introduced in the market; this is generally referred to
as external validity . Therefore, the company has to weigh the value of introducing a beneficial drug
against the risk associated with such an introduction.
A second feature of uncertain decisions is to determine when and how to respond. Consider the earlier
example of a major airline when a low-cost competitor enters the scene. The airline must decide when
and by how much to modify its fares and whether to introduce new of fers. The decision resembles a
balancing act between ensuring profitability and incurring costs from strategy changes. To determine
the best course of action, companies often conduct sensitivity analyses. This involves tweaking
different decision variables and observing the potential impact on outcomes at dif ferent points in time.
By doing so, the airline can gauge which factors, when and to what degree, might necessitate a
change in their initial decision.
A third feature of uncertain decisions is to determine which options to follow: Should the business stick
to conventional options or explore new ones? For instance, in our earlier example when an electronics
retailer is confronted with a backorder situation for a popular new smartphone, the conventional
approaches are to either sell the available stock or continue accepting backorders. However , given the
uncertainties and potential customer dissatisfaction, they might consider a new strategy: of fering
discounts to those customers willing to backorder and wait for delivery . While this strategy might entail
a short-term reduction in profit, it has the potential to increase long-term customer loyalty and mitigate
dissatisfaction from extended wait times.
To reduce decision uncertainty , prediction models are used that simulate dif ferent potential situations
and how these situations will impact dif ferent aspects of the business. In this chapter , we will examine
how machine-learning algorithms can be used to solve problems in supply chain management,
especially when decisions need to be made with uncertain information. One such decision-making
under uncertainty is identifying products that will be backordered.
12.3 BACKORDER AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
Beginning in 2020, the microchip industry faced supply chain issues because of the pandemic, labor
shortages, and geopolitical unrest. This resulted in many technological products going out of stock.
Consumers who placed orders were left waiting, sometimes indefinitely , because the firms were not
sure when they would receive the chips to fulfill these orders. The Defense Logistics Agency of the
U.S. Department of Defense, which manages the global defense supply chain, faces similar
challenges. It routinely takes steps to maximize combat readiness by minimizing backorders.3
Backorder  can be defined as an order of a product that a firm cannot fill due to the product’ s
unavailability but expects to fill at a future date. Backorders result in disappointed consumers and
reduced profitability for firms as backorders can deter consumers from purchasing the product. Recent
research has demonstrated that consumers whose products were backordered are far less likely to
purchase the product in the future compared to consumers whose products were not backordered.4
The longer the backorder lasts, the greater the drop in future purchases. Hence, businesses try their
level best to avoid the situation of backorders piling up because of its long-term impact on customer
satisfaction, ability to retain customers, and firm profitability . One commonly recommended way to
avoid backorders is to accurately forecast demand. However , that is easier said than done because
several factors outside the influence of the business introduce uncertainties in forecasting, such as
changing customer tastes that make demand uncertain, economic upturns and downturns, gross
domestic product (GDP), geopolitical conflicts, unrest, or a pandemic. Firms do not want to lose
customers or lose their trust by not being able to fulfill an order on time. However , the enormous
pressure that firms face to ensure timely delivery of products, especially when the firm itself is reliant
on other suppliers for parts, is not trivial. This pressure can result in increased labor and production
costs, overstocking to prevent shortages, and high shipment expenses.
Backorders also cause the bullwhip  effect, which occurs when a small change in demand is
overestimated and communicated through the supply chain to retailers, wholesalers, distributors, and
eventually manufacturers. However , if the demand is temporary , it dies out, causing an oversupply of
some products. W e witnessed this during the pandemic when people staying home started remodeling
and a huge demand for furniture ensued, resulting in furniture being severely backordered. To make up
for the increased demand, firms manufactured more furniture. However , with the easing of the
pandemic restrictions, the demand for furniture went down, resulting in an oversupply of furniture. This
is a classic example of the bullwhip ef fect depicted in Figure 12.1 .
Description
Figure 12.1  Bullwhip Ef fect
However , we need to keep in mind one important factor when considering backorders. Although
estimating which products are likely to be backordered may be one of the most uncertain situations to
predict and can cause a high level of disruption for the business and its customers, it is not an issue
that businesses face routinely or at predictable intervals. It is possible that a business may not have
faced a backorder issue for several years. Hence, the data the business needs to predict backorders
may be imbalanced. That is, businesses may not have a very good method to predict why and when
they might face a backorder issue. W e know that the predictive model is only as good as the data it is
trained on. Hence, having imbalanced data can af fect the quality of predictions. Machine-learning
methods are now routinely used to tackle the problem of backorder forecasting, given their ability to
analyze large structured and unstructured datasets that are unbalanced.
We next present a tree-based machine-learning method that has been used to estimate backorders so
that strategies can be devised to address this supply chain issue.
12.4 MACHINE-LEARNING OPTIONS TO AID IN DECISION-
MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Machine learning, especially tree-based models, of fer businesses a structured way to make decisions
under uncertainty . These models segment data based on dif ferent conditions, providing insight into
complex scenarios. For instance, the airline faced with competition from a low-cost carrier could use
decision trees to analyze historical data on passenger preferences, price sensitivities, and other
factors to predict potential outcomes. Similarly , the electronics retailer uncertain about how to manage
stock for a new smartphone could deploy tree-based models to evaluate previous product launches
and understand customer behavior patterns in the face of backorders. Through these models,
businesses can simulate various decision pathways, assess probable outcomes, and make more
informed choices even in the presence of uncertainty .
12.4.1 Components of a Decision Tree Model
Decision trees are supervised algorithms  that require labeled data (i.e., data where the relationship
between the predictor and the outcome variable is available). Decision trees can be used for both
regression tasks and classification depending on whether the outcome variable is continuous or
categorical. The term classification and regression tree  (CAR T) captures this ability of tree models (we
will use the terms decision tree  and tree model  interchangeably , but they mean the same thing). For
backorder predictions, we will focus on classification trees.
Before we discuss how classification trees make predictions, let’ s understand the dif ferent components
of a decision tree as depicted in Figure 12.2 .
Figure 12.2  Components of a Decision Tree
The root node  is the first node in a decision tree. This also represents the predictor variable or
feature that is split first to divide the entire data into two sets.
The terminal node  or leaf is the final node of a decision tree that cannot be divided further . These
terminal nodes contain the mean value of the outcome variable (if the outcome is a continuous
variable) or the majority class (if the outcome is a classification task).
The internal/decision node  is a subnode of the tree between the root node and the terminal node.
At an internal or decision node, the data are further divided into new internal nodes or into leaf
nodes.
A branch  represents the connection or relationship between a root node and an internal node,
between internal nodes, or between an internal node and a leaf node.
The depth  of a tree is the longest distance between the root node and any terminal node (leaf).
The tree in Figure 12.2  has a depth of 2.
12.4.2 Classification Trees
Consider a simple illustration of backorder prediction. Assume our dataset has two predictor variables:
forecasted sales  and transit time for the product to arrive . Both are categorical variables with two
levels: low and high. That is, the forecasted sales for a product can be low or high, and the transit time
