Use the cash receipts and bank deposit data files to complete the following analyses as part of your audit 
of cash for the first quarter. Use pivot tables where applicable.
	 1.	 Summarize daily sales, daily cash sales, and daily credit card sales by Truck 1.
	 2.	 Summarize daily deposits by Truck 1.
	 3.	 Prepare a reconciliation of daily receipts with daily deposits. Then, identify if there are any daily 
sales that do not match daily deposits. 
PAC 2.3  Financial Accounting: Create Analyses of Sales
Data   Financial Accounting   You are preparing the first quarter sales results for Pizza My Heart.
	 1.	 Create a PivotTable that summarizes sales by Truck 1 and show the total sales for each month in the 
first quarter (January, February, March).
	 2.	 Create a PivotTable that summaries sales by product for the first quarter for Truck 1. Sort the data 
from highest sales to lowest sales.
PAC 2.4  Managerial Accounting: Create Analyses to Understand Costs per Product
Data   Managerial Accounting   You are a managerial accountant asked to prepare an analysis of 
costs. Use the purchases data file to answer the following questions with PivotTables:
	 1.	 What is the average of total costs per raw material ingredient? (Hint: use total costs, do not consider 
units).
	 2.	 What is the average cost per raw material ingredient by vendor? (Hint: Create two PivotTable calcu-
lations. Cost per unit of measure = Total Cost/(Size * Quantity) and Cost per unit = Total Cost/Total 
Quantity)
	 3.	 Are there vendors that are charging higher than average costs for ingredients? 

Le Grind Continuing Case: Use Descriptive Statistics to Analyze Sales Activity Over the First Three Years of Business
2-69
PAC 2.5 Tax Accounting: Create Analyses to Plan for Expansion 
Data
Tax Accounting
Pizza My Heart is considering purchasing another food truck, and florida 
charges sales tax on food truck sales. Sal wants to choose the best location, not only for sales, but also for 
sales tax. Use the Florida population and sales tax by city data files to create a visualization that shows 
which cities have the largest populations and which also shows the tax rates by city.
  1.  What are the top ten most populated cities in Florida? 
2. Use a PivotTable to determine the cities with the ten lowest tax rates.
  3.  Pizza My Heart is considering Tallahassee as a potential city for a new truck. Sal estimates that sales 
in the first year will be $150,000. How much sales tax will be collected? 
Le Grind Continuing Case: Use Descriptive Statistics to Analyze 
Sales Activity Over the First Three Years of Business
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more details about the continuing case.

