client’s sales returns in the first 30 days after year end. The descriptive analysis revealed sales returns 
dramatically decreased compared to the prior year. Further, you noted that the largest decrease related to 
sales returns was in the northwest region. You must perform diagnostic analyses to understand why there 
was a decrease in sales returns.
Next is an outline of the data analysis objective, initial question, sub-questions, and possible measures. 
Complete the outline by matching the appropriate statement to the corresponding blank square. State-
ment choices may be used once, more than once, or not at all.
	 a.	 What is driving the sales return decrease?
	 b.	 Are there unusual patterns in the northwest region sales returns for certain product lines?

Brief Exercises  3-49
	 c.	 Create a trend analysis showing returns by date for each product line for the current year compared 
to the prior year.
	 d.	 Filter data to isolate the northwest region sales returns and examine total sales returns, average sales 
returns, and sales return quantity.
	 e.	 Create an optimization model to identify the most appropriate number of sales returns given the 
constraint of sales and quantity manufactured.
	 f.	 Calculate the standard deviation of sales and compare to the standard deviation of employee 
expenses for the period.
	 g.	 Calculate the overall spending by the company in customer services to determine if sales returns are 
related to manufacturing quality.
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Why did sales 
returns decrease 
from prior year?
Are there anomalies 
in sales returns for any 
specific product the 
company sells?
Are there identifiable 
trends in sales returns 
for any specific 
product?
Create a scatterplot 
comparing quantity 
returned to sales price 
for items to identify 
anomalies in returns.
Create a scatterplot 
comparing sales 
dollars to sales returns 
for items to identify 
anomalies in returns. 
Why is there a 
large decrease in 
sales returns in the 
northwest region?
What factors are 
driving the decrease 
in sales returns in the 
northwest region?
BE 3.9  (LO 4)  Match the analysis to its description. Each term may be used once, more than once, or 
not at all.
Analyses: 
	 a.	 Independent variable
	 b.	 Linear function
	 c.	 Regression statistics
	 d.	 Correlation coefficient
	 e.	 Dependent variable
	 f.	 Adjusted R2
Description
Analysis
1. The statistical measures used to evaluate a regression model.
2. The outcome variable in a regression model.
3. The variable or variables that influence the outcome variable.
4. This type of relationship shows steady increases or decreases 
over the range of the independent variable.
5. This statistic measures the strength of the relationship between 
the dependent and independent variables.
6. This statistic explains how well the regression line fits the data.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

3-50  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
BE 3.10  (LO 4)  The objective is to engage in predictive analyses. For each of the following initial or 
sub-question, identify the independent variable and the dependent variable.
	 1.	 How much will revenue change with a 15% increase in sales volume?
	 2.	 How much will revenue increase with a 10% increase in production volume?
	 3.	 How much will maintenance expenses change if we increase production volume by 5%?
	 4.	 As unemployment increases, how much will sales volume decrease?
	 5.	 As the number of employees increase, how much will information security costs increase?
BE 3.11  (LO 4, 6)  Accounting Information Systems   Assume you are an accounting information 
systems accountant asked to consider the success of your company’s cyber training program. You col-
lected data on the monthly number of cybersecurity training hours provided to employees and the num-
ber of cyberthreats reported. You created the following trendline line graph.
0
2
0.8
0
6.0
6.3
8.0
10.3
11.0
12.4
14.3
14.6
16.5
18.4
18.8
19.6
22.6
22.9
23.8
28.8
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Cyber Threats
Reported
Cyber Training Hours Provided
Cybersecurity Training and Reports
y = 0.2387x + 5.1176
R2 = 0.8137
Use the information provided in the line graph and the equation to answer the following questions:
	 1.	 If the company offered 9 hours of cyber training during a period, what is the expected number of 
cybersecurity threats reported by employees?
	 2.	 If the company offered 35 hours of cyber training during a period, what is the expected number of 
cybersecurity threats reported by employees?
BE 3.12  (LO 5)  Match the appropriate term to each definition. Terms can be used once, more than once, 
or not at all.
	 a.	 Constraints
	 b.	 Objective function
	 c.	 Decision variable
	 d.	 Optimization
	 e.	 Linear regression
	 f.	 Dependent variable
	 g.	 Independent variable
Definition
Term
1. The process of selecting values of variables that minimize or maximize some 
quantity of interest.
2. The unknown values a model seeks to determine.
3. The mathematical equation that describes the output target that we seek to 
minimize or maximize.
4. The limitations, requirements, or other restrictions that must be imposed on 
any solution.

Brief Exercises  3-51
BE 3.13  (LO 5, 6)  Managerial Accounting   As a managerial accountant for a manufacturing com-
pany, you are asked to identify the optimal number of units that must be produced in order to maximize 
the company’s contribution margin (CM). Your company manufactures four different types of units:
•  Standard widgets
•  Blue flying widgets
•  Red swimming widgets
•  Yellow hopping widgets
To perform prescriptive analysis, your manager has built a spreadsheet for you to execute a Microsoft 
Excel Solver function.
Standard
Blue Flying
Red Swimming
Yellow Hopping
Total
Number Produced
1
CM per unit
Total CM
Machine Hours Per Unit
Total Machine Hours
Constraints
Machine Hours
Demand
17.87
17.87
6
6
1,200
1
15.20
15.20
8
8
1,750
1
21.00
21.00
12
12
1,670
1
19.87
19.87
11
11
73.94
0
37
1,250
50,000
	 1.	 What is the decision variable in the model?
	 2.	 What are the constraints in the model?
	 3.	 What is the objective function?
BE 3.14  (LO 5, 6)  Financial Accounting   Your private company wants to expand and grow into a new 
product line; however, that growth requires increased capital and investment in physical assets, people, 
and materials. You are asked to consider the most appropriate strategy to acquire the needed capital. You 
volunteered to engage in data analysis to provide insight to the discussion. 
	 1.	 What is the objective of the analysis?
	 2.	 Develop two questions that will be relevant to the analysis.
	 3.	 What analyses will you use to answer each question?
BE 3.15  (LO 6)  Identify whether the professional has developed a measurable and specific question 
appropriate for the practice area.
	 1.	 A financial statement auditor asks, “What is the expected value of the client issuing stock based on 
current market prices?”
	 2.	 An accounting information systems accountant asks, “How many units should the company pro-
duce to optimize the company’s contribution margin?”
	 3.	 A tax accountant poses the question, “Based on last year’s tax return, how will the current year 
changes in tax law impact the client’s tax liability?”
	 4.	 A managerial accountant considers “Which products use the highest amount of raw materials in 
production?”
	 5.	 A financial accountant ponders “What dollar amount of accounts receivable are classified in the 
over 90 days outstanding category?”

3-52  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
BE 3.16  (LO 6)  Match each statement to the most appropriate accounting professional practice area. 
Each accounting professional practice can be used once, more than once, or not at all.
	 a.	 Accounting information systems
	 b.	 Financial accounting
	 c.	 Managerial accounting
	 d.	 Auditing
	 e.	 Tax accounting
Statement
Practice Area
1. Simone and the information technology team are investigating the possibility 
of investing in new technologies.
2. Chung would like to improve the company’s information system performance 
and is evaluating processing time to prepare month-end management reports.
3. Christine wants to identify unusual sales transactions that may have contributed 
to an unexpected increase in the client’s revenue compared to last year.
4. Daniel is currently using the Scenario Manager function in Excel to identify 
interest rates, payment terms, and length of a loan to evaluate various capital 
requirement strategies.
5. Ellis is analyzing a client’s tax liability calculation to identify if there are 
expenses that are not properly included as deductions.
6. Pierre is currently examining the relationship between machine hours and 
maintenance expenses to predict future manufacturing modifications.
7. Mica is performing a regression analysis to estimate the predicted monthly 
revenue for a retail client. He will then compare the predicted monthly 
revenue to the client’s recorded amount.
Exercises
EX 3.1  (LO 2, 6)  Data   Financial Accounting   Analysis of Measures As the company controller 
for a yarn manufacturing supply company, you are asked to investigate sales by customer for the month 
of June 2025. You have critically assessed the objective and questions of your analysis and documented 
them as follows:
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Understand 
sales by 
customer 
for the 
month of 
June.
What happened to 
sales in the month 
of June?
What was total sales?
What was the average 
sales amount?
What was total sales 
by customer?
Which customers had 
the highest sales?
	 1.	Sum of sales amount (total 
measure).
	 2.	Average of sales amount 
(measure of location).
	 3.	Total sales separated by customer.
	 4.	Total sales separated by 
customer using a highlight table.
Use the available data to perform the analyses proposed in the possible measures section of the analysis plan.
EX 3.2  (LO 2, 6)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Analysis of Measures Your company manufac-
tures high-quality yarn for sale at craft stores and yarn and specialty shops across the country. Specifi-
cally, your facility manufactures merino wool yarn in a variety of colors and in two weights: chunky and 
DK weight. The product manager wants to understand differences in production quantities by product 
between 2025 and 2024 in the July manufacturing period, and has provided you with production data for 
select products. Use the spreadsheet to identify the available data and complete the following:
	 1.	 What is the objective of the analysis?
	 2.	 What are two initial questions you can ask about the data?
	 3.	 Create a column chart depicting the production quantity by ProductDescription and Year.
	 4.	 Calculate and identify several descriptive measures:
a.	 Calculate the Average ProductionQuantity by ProductDescription in 2024 compared to 2025.
b.  Identify the lowest number of units produced by ProductionDescription in 2024 compared to 2025.
c.	 Identify the highest number of units produced by ProductionDescription in 2024 compared to 2025.

Exercises  3-53
EX 3.3  (LO 2, 6)  Data   Financial Accounting   Tableau Highlight Table Your controller would 
like to better understand changes in specific vendor payments between 2025 and 2024 that were made 
by the city you work for. The controller is specifically interested in understanding the payments made to 
the following vendors:
•  4-Star Hose & Supply
•  Aecom Technical Services, Inc.
•  WRG, LLC
•  Winston Water Cooler Ltd.
•  Zoetis Inc.
You have downloaded the vendor payment file and uploaded it into Tableau for analysis. Create a highlight 
table in Tableau to identify changes in payments to each of these five vendors between 2024 and 2025.
EX 3.4  (LO 2, 6)  Data   Accounting Information Systems   Analysis of Measures As part of your 
company’s new cybersecurity program, each employee must participate in an annual training. The train-
ings are conducted in a variety of modalities (in-person, online synchronous, and online asynchronous). 
You and your team have tracked the training expenses each month as well as the number of cybersecurity 
threats reported by employees. Employees can report cybersecurity threats such as phishing attempts, or 
IT specialists can report threats through examination of the monthly login report. You have been asked to 
investigate cybersecurity training costs over the period from January 2023 through December 2025.
Review and complete the chart by identifying sub-questions and possible measures used to address 
your identified sub-questions. 
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Understand 
cybersecurity training 
expenses.
What is the 
total amount of 
cybersecurity training 
expense for 2023, 2024 
and 2025?
1. 
2. 
What is the 
percentage change of 
cybersecurity training 
expenses between 
2023 and 2024 and 
between 2024 and 
2025?
3. 
4. 
	 5.	 Then, conduct your descriptive analyses using the provided data file.
EX 3.5  (LO 3, 6)  Data   Auditing   Diagnostic Measures Assume you are an audit staff assigned to 
audit the financial statements of a private entity distribution client for the year ended December 31, 2025. 
The client does not manufacture items, but acquires finished products and sells to a variety of retailers. 
The senior on the engagement team asked you to perform analytical procedures on sales returns. Your 
descriptive analysis revealed that sales returns increased as a percentage of sales. Use the spreadsheet to 
perform the following:
	 1.	 Calculate total sales dollars, returns dollars, sales quantity, and returns quantity for each year 2024 
and 2025.
	 2.	 Calculate the percentage change in sales dollars, returns dollars, sales quantity, and returns quantity 
between 2024 and 2025.
	 3.	 Create a scatterplot whereby sales dollars are on the x-axis and the sales returns are on the y-axis.
	 4.	 Which months in 2025 have sales returns that you may consider as anomalies?
EX 3.6  (LO 3, 6)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Trend Analysis with Line Graphs You are an 
intern for a manufacturing company, and your company controller has learned you have completed a 
data analytics course with an emphasis in accounting. The controller has performed basic descriptive 
analysis of the company’s sales for the month of June 2025 but wants to understand why sales increased 
5.14%. Use the data set to complete the following:
	 1.	 What is the initial question for this analysis?
	 2.	 Identify two sub-questions for the analysis.
	 3.	 Identify potential measures that you may calculate to answer these two sub-questions.
	 4.	 Create a line graph showing the trend in June sales in 2024 compared to 2025.
	 5.	 Create a column bar chart showing sales to each customer during June 2024 compared to June 2025.

3-54  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
