2 AI, Crypto Assets, and Financial
Markets
DOI: 10.4324/9781003669357-3
2.1 Introduction
Globalization brings a reduction in the barriers—whether technological or
legislative—to economic exchanges between countries. Moreover,
globalization brings the gradual integration of economies and societies
driven by novel technologies, new economic interaction, and interrelation
among the national and international policies of various players such as
governments, international organizations, business, labor, and civil society.
Hence, globalization increased the cross-border flow of capital, goods,
services, and information.
Both domestic and cross-border M&A deals are susceptible to insider
trading for the reason that acquirers traditionally pay a large premium for
target stocks. Thus, traders who acquire target stocks or call options before
the public announcement of a deal often stand to earn large profits upon the
announcement. Hence, in a cross-border M&A, from the target country
regulators’ standpoint, insiders linked with the foreign acquirer are mostly
residents of foreign jurisdictions, which means that for these foreign
insiders, while their illegal trades take part in the target country’s market,
the crucial evidence required for prosecuting them is in most cases not
under the control of the target country authorities. Thus, an executive in the
acquirer can easily tip a friend regarding the forthcoming cross-border
M&A deal. To that extent, Guo, Lixiong, and Zhang, Sherry1
find that “cross-border deals involving acquirers from
countries with weak legal institutions, more acceptance of
cheating on taxes, and high corruption are associated with

greater intensity of insider trading. This provides further
evidence that some of the trades on the target country’s
financial market are driven by inside information leaked from
foreign acquirers.”
Finance is vital for strong entrepreneurship and, subsequently, constraints
on finance have an impact. Also, finance holds back the opening of markets
along both supply and demand lines through its influence on the growth of
fixed-cost investments such as infrastructure.
The financial markets have enlarged and altered significantly owing to
enhancement in technology and the ever-altering regulatory and social
environment. Moreover, there has been a spread of financial notions,
instruments, and tools because of augmented computing power and
immediate information sharing through networks. Hence, the globalization
of businesses and economies continues to affect the field of finance, and so,
in an AI economy, investors foresee information shifts by adapting their
portfolios to defend against these shifts.
Advances in digitization and information technology have profoundly
altered and transformed the financial industry; as a result, traditional
financial institutions and banks are losing their sovereignty as new market
entrants and emerging technologies replace or substitute their part as
financial intermediaries.
2.2 Digitalization
First of all, digital technologies have spread into economic activity, altering
production patterns via automation and consumption patterns via
increasingly digital platforms. Moreover, the principle of digital technology
is the “binary-digits” setup for storing information and encompassing
processing, storage, and exchange of data. It is worth mentioning here that
the ongoing digitalization is leading to rapid transformations in the whole
structure of the global economy.2 Two driving forces are obvious: firstly,
digital platforms as a dominant business model, and second, an expanding
role for intangible inputs such as data and software. Hence, digitalization
has caused the transformation of the global economy into the digital

economy. Thus, further than the control of the economy by digital
platforms, an augmented function for intangible inputs such as data and
software is a quality of the digital economy which means that by bringing
forth noteworthy scale economies with amplified fixed costs and
diminished marginal costs benefitting large corporations3 are offering a
competitive edge for early technology adopters. On the other hand,
digitalization enhances productivity in the short run by deterring entry by
new companies, leading to lower growth in the long run.4 To that extent, S.
Abis and L. Veldkamp5 find that a considerable transformation in the
production function has taken place, and the adoption of AI and big data
technologies, along with the collection of stocks of data, diverges broadly in
corporations’ manufacturing progress.
It could be said that digital technology allows developing countries to
augment economic growth and thus reduce the difference with developed
countries by enabling them to go beyond physical constraints in
infrastructure, which means boosting integration and stimulating national
competitiveness globally. In line with this, Thuy Linh Cao and Judy Hsu6
argue that “digitalization can even effectively reduce the detrimental effects
of geographic and religion gap on exports. Besides, digitalization is also
seen to help countries overcome language, administration, and economic
gaps to promote export activities.”
Digital technology has let corporations to boost their product and service
reach 
globally, 
capturing 
opportunities 
to 
augment 
operational
effectiveness, including managing productivity and customer relationship
management (CRM).7 Moreover, the integration of AI technologies into
international business practices is indispensable for corporations to remain
competitive, which means that corporations have to adapt to and
acclimatize in the AI global landscape.
Digital transformations change microeconomic allocation via the
electronic functioning of markets and macroeconomic outcomes, generating
alterations in integration and globalization. Moreover, digitalization has
fallout effects on modern economies and societies, such as notable savings
in costs.8 It seems that current digitalization has not been transforming the
central laws of economics but has activated alterations concerning agents’

interaction in the market. To that extent, V. Labhard and J. Lehtimäki9
suggest that
“better institutions and governance tend to be associated with
greater growth-enhancing effects from digital technologies…
while technology has historically had a growth-enhancing
effect, the absence or presence of established and high-quality
societal environment can help in amplifying the potential
growth effects”.
While digital technologies influence sectors in different ways, they generate
productivity gains at the corporate level, with more productive corporations
being more digital.10 To that extent, digitalization generates digital goods
and services.
It has to be taken into consideration that information facilitation and
management have a central role in market running, demanding the
cooperation of public and private sectors. To that extent, Salomé Viljoen11
argues that
“the market machine mechanisms deployed in digital
platforms both vex and challenge these practices, exposing
contradictions between digital markets and the grounding
theories that justify market deference. Yet this contradiction
presents not only a regulatory challenge, but an opportunity to
consider how informationalism beyond managerialism may be
put toward a different regulatory approach and help to realize
a different set of allocative goals and governing institutions”.
Hence, information procedures allow digital platforms to adjust prices to
their benefit, but on the other hand, high-quality public data permit
institutional designs that transfer power toward community control.
It is distinctive that digital technologies are very general, applying all
over the economy and activities. Moreover, digital technologies have
characteristics that make them more authoritative than other technologies,

making them more difficult to fully take advantage of. Additionally, the
significance of most new technologies comes from the fact that they spread
across many different users and uses. Is there an interplay of digital
technologies with institutions and governance? Institutions play a
significant part in forming modern economies, being crucial drivers of
growth.12 Hence, digitalization, institutions, and governance stipulate
openings to economic agents regarding information access, a framework for
market transactions, and by permitting enforcement. In other words,
digitalization by utilizing AI systems allows the SEC to spot and prevent
insider trading.
It is worth mentioning here that even though digitalization is regarded as
a massive game changer that would accelerate corporations’ productivity
and produce value for the economy as a whole, this has not transpired yet.
Robert Anderton et al.13 show that
“digitalisation tends to have on average a positive impact on
firm level productivity growth. However, it does not seem to
be either a massive gamechanger or a “one-size-fits-all”
strategy that manage to deliver productivity gains to all firms
alike. The impact of digitalisation on the average firm’s TFP
growth is relatively small and we find that most firms are not
able to benefit from digitalisation at all…intangible assets are
closely linked with digital technologies and act as a
complement to digitalisation to magnify its positive impact on
the average firm’s TFP growth.”
Hence, the transition to a digital economy has been verified as a precedence
by policymakers and international institutions and so implementing
numerous policies in order to speed up digital adoption and in that way
enhancing productivity.14
It could be said that corporations only in some areas benefit on average
from investing in digital technologies, which means that digitalization is a
game changer only for corporations implementing digital technologies to
become considerably more productive over time. Hence, a higher digital

investment by itself is not turning highly productive “laggards” into frontier
corporations, which means that corporation’s surface at the top of the
productivity distribution is achieved via a more structural innovation
strategy and not directly after an increase in digital investment. Also, it
could be said that policies that incentivize corporations to become more
digital over time should be constructed in a manner assisting “laggard”
companies to fully reap the productivity returns from higher digital
investments on a case-by-case basis, and so corporations must implement
new digital technologies under unique conditions in their daily operations.15
To that extent, investment treaties grant protections and incentives to
foreign investors, allowing them to pursue remedies if they consider these
provisions have been breached.
It has to be taken into consideration that digitalization boosts the
effectiveness of information collection, storage, and exchange, making
possible the collection and processing of information in a fully automated
way. Moreover, digitalization permits storing large amounts of detailed data
and relies on a fully automated data exchange, and so, digitalization
generates economies of scale and network consequences, shaping the
economic basis for the speedy advancement of platforms. Hence,
digitalization produces room for new products and services, such as e-books
or personalized items, thus advancing not only the efficiency of inventory
flows but also tracking and recognizing customers. Thus, digitalization
generates the processing of information in a fully automated manner, such
as analyzing data by AI, permitting a fully automated data exchange
between market participants or members of the value chain, boosting the
evolution of platforms. In addition, personalized advertising augments
consumer choice by lowering advertising costs and permitting new entrants
to market their products without a massive high marketing cost,16 which
means that personalized ad-based monetization permits apps to advance
“high-quality services to consumers for free.”17
It is worth noting that the new players are cloud operators in industries
with a significant digital goods or services component, gaining deep insight
into their cloud users’ needs and business models, creating another channel
for insider trading. On the other hand, AAI digitalization will alter the
whole concept of material life on earth grounded on the rationale of

introducing AAI humanoids consuming a particular kind of energy, which
might alter the global production unless AAI humanoids have the same
feeding demands as humans. This means that the laws of conventional
economics will apply to the AAI economy as well, differentiating only in
the tools of implementation.
It has to be taken into account that the consequences of digitalization on
the manufacturing area, where digital means play a less direct role, vary
considerably from their influence on traditional services or digital products,
which could gain the most from digitalization and thus expose noteworthy
disparities in how digital transformation remodels global trade.18
2.3 Centralization versus Decentralization
Centralization encompasses the central bureaucratic decision-making that
most businesses undertake, and second a centralized ledger records all data,
information, and transactions such as a corporation’s assets, liabilities,
costs, and revenue. From an organizational standpoint, centralization
applies to government structures and at the core of corporations, which
means that users have no control over the single decision-maker running
centralized systems, resulting in possible censorship. The best possible level
of decentralization necessitates balancing the costs of poor decisions owing
to poor information and those arising from goal incongruence which means
that deciding on the optimal level of decentralization implicates a trade-off
between coordination and adaptation.
It is characteristic that the world is becoming centralized and so
gradually is controlled by a few MNEs to the impairment of the many. On
the other hand, decentralization offers more effective management in the
financial sector, greater privacy protection, and fairer interfaces between the
public sector, private sector, and people domain which means putting
humans at the center of decision-making. Also, due to globalization and
access to technologies, more and more interfaces between the public sector,
the private sector, and people have become digitized, and so, digitalization
connects people, businesses, and states empowering access to public goods,
generating digital identity, and improving financial dealings via cyberspace
and AI systems, which means that e-commerce and social media link people

everywhere. In other words, the capability to digitally interconnect and
share information is enabled by cyberspace and AI space.
It is worth noting that cyberspace became centralized in many ways, and
so, cyberspace supposed to be decentralized. In the end the wish of states to
