governance, such is no longer the case, and so VC corporations are less

involved in developing and growing emergent businesses, capitulating to
the impulses of their founders whose business strategies are grounded in
undermining the competition to dominate the market.84 To that extent, VC
corporations merely copy the investments made by other corporations. Also,
while the absence of due diligence results in unsuccessful investment
decisions, the use of AI in investment decision-making offers better
investment results.
Furthermore, AI can alter the entire VC landscape by opening the door
for a greater number of successful startup openings, while concurrently
expanding corporation investments which means that by integrating AI into
the decision-making process, corporations can mitigate the influence of
human bias and deliver more accurate decisions than those delivered by
human experts. Thus, corporations that exploit objective, data-driven
approaches to investment platforms will outperform those that do not, and
so incorporating data analytics into VC investment decision-making will
augment profit opportunities and expand portfolio diversification.
It is worth mentioning here that specialization leads to lower risk in
cross-border investments from a venture capitalist’s point of view, which
means that with escalating deal-specificity, the support and value
improvement of a foreign portfolio corporation are guaranteed in
international markets as a result of the investor’s specialization. Moreover,
as venture capital corporations invest in new businesses functioning in
ambitious markets, these investments are typified by high levels of
asymmetric information and uncertainty. In line, investors encounter
institutional, geographical, cultural, and legal distance from their own
countries, which means that this inaccessibility rises higher information
asymmetries, investment risk, and costs for the investor if the target
business is located abroad, and so the investor allocates more resources to
supervising and managing the business abroad.85 Concerning venture
capital, A. Nörthemann86 argues that
“the likelihood of a cross-border deal increases with higher
levels of industry specialization. Furthermore, this effect is
moderated by determinants at the institutional and portfolio
company levels, reflecting the degree of information

asymmetry between the venture capital firm and the portfolio
company.”
A crucial factor in the appeal of venture capital (VC)-financed
entrepreneurship for high-earning prospective founders is the anticipated
time to create a startup’s initial product for the reason that founder-CEOs’
cash compensation rises significantly after product development, thus
lessening the non-diversifiable risk that founders encounter at startup birth.
Consequently, a startup’s projected time to develop its first product is a
crucial basis for the appeal of VC-sponsored entrepreneurship. To that
extent, Michael Ewens87 et al. argue that
“the increases in CEOs’ cash compensation after a startup
begins product development are large enough that non-
diversifiable risk held by founder-CEOs falls substantially
after achieving this milestone…a startup’s expected time to
developing its first product is a key determinant of the
attractiveness of VC-backed entrepreneurship”.
Hence, increases in CEOs’ cash compensation after a startup begins product
development are large enough that non-diversifiable risk held by founder-
CEOs falls substantially after achieving the product development
breakthrough.
On the one hand, Felix von Meyerinck88 et al. argue that
“directors’ involvement in forced CEO turnovers can be
expected to be assessed by the market and to affect directors’
reputation…Directors interlocked to a forced turnover
experience an economically large…directors are not penalized
for involvement in a CEO turnover per se but for forced CEO
turnovers that are related to governance failures by the board”.
On the other hand, sacking a CEO is seen as an indication of malfunction in
the supervising and is harmful to a director’s status.

It has to be taken into consideration that conditional risk not only
clarifies profitability and investment, but also supervising conditional risk is
imperative for judging the economic significance of variances, appreciating
market competence, and assessing the performance of asset managers. N.J.
Gormsen and C.S. Jensen89 argue that “Overall, the impact of conditional
market risk on anomaly alphas is larger than the impact of unconditional
market risk, suggesting that researchers and practitioners should seriously
consider controlling for conditional risk whenever implementing the CAPM
in the future.”
It is characteristic that venture capitalists with high social status in the
national market invest abroad due to augmented national experience.
Moreover, the positive development of a portfolio corporation is expected
when the investor is accustomed to business patterns in the particular
industry of investment. Additionally, industry-specific knowledge is vital in
ascertaining good investment opportunities and adding value to
corporations.
Also, corporation-level factors such as industry specialization or ties to a
foreign country90 play a part in investment decisions. Antonia
Nörthemann91 argues that
“the probability of investing abroad increases with higher
degrees of industry specialization even though international
deals are often associated with higher risk. This relationship
illustrates how the liability of foreignness has a varying
influence on an investor’s investment decision depending on
the investor’s specialization in the specific industry to which
the deal is assigned.”
It is worth mentioning here that venture capitalists do not seek long-term
progressive growth of the business where they invested, since this would
not let an acceptable return on all the capital invested, which means that
they demand well-timed and substantive results.92 It is worth noting here
that the active portfolio optimization allows investors to gain access to
stocks, bonds, and private equity (PE) funds, and so ex ante commitment

has large consequences for investors’ portfolios and welfare.93 To that
extent, Elise Gourier94 et al. argue that
“investors want to change their capital allocations when
capital is called—most often to increase the allocation. Hence,
investors are under allocated to PE and willing to pay a large
premium to adjust the quantity committed upon capital call. A
direct implication of PE under allocation is that the demand
for changing the amount committed is asymmetric. Investors
would rarely want to reduce their allocation to PE, but highly
value the option to top-up their allocation when capital is
called”.
Furthermore, venture capital and private equity have achieved importance
in the market, and so venture funding for R&D has stimulated the
establishment of several startups. To that extent, Shaun Wang95 indicates
that an augmented level of R&D input improves the corporation’s value
growth.
Financial liberalization is one of the most important aspects of
globalization involving both short-term capital flows and FDI. Moreover,
financial globalization is illustrated by the fact that trading in the global
foreign exchange market has far outpaced the growth in international trade
in goods and services. Additionally, foreign exchange is increasingly being
treated as an asset or a commodity, not just as a means of payment, with a
parallel increase in the use of derivatives in foreign exchange markets.
Changes in global conditions, such as the decline in nominal interest rates,
gave a spur to capital flows to emerging markets. Moreover, international
trade is changing because of the introduction of new technologies,
innovations, and geopolitical modifications, which means they are opening
up new prospects for international business and trade expansion.96 Taking
into account that performance-targeting incentives upset corporate policies,
competitive forces stabilize the strain to meet performance targets via
alterations in other corporate policies, such as investments in capital and
innovation.97

2.7 AI and Financial Markets
Markets are powerful institutions run by law encompassing public and
private regimes fashioning entitlements, enforcing market exchanges, and
restricting expropriation, which means that distinctive types of markets
exemplify fluctuating normative concepts of the market. To that extent,
Hanoch Dagan98 et al. argue that “appreciating the significance of law as
the infrastructure of markets reveals that no particular market structure is
inevitable. Instead, every market order is the result of a complex set of legal
and political choices.” On the one hand, markets are the invention of human
societies, and the form of any market is grounded in the legal rules guiding
actors’ behavior in the market. On the other hand, beyond the law, markets
function according to economic principles articulating their running. In
other words, while markets are in part legal constructs shaping their
construction, competent markets are invented so as to maximize economic
output. To that extent, an AAI technology will be able to illustrate the
interplay between legal and economic principles in valuing the role of the
market at any moment in order to make the right predictions.
The appearance of international digital trading settings has made it
possible for corporations to globalize operations on different trading
platforms. Long-term financial planning takes a considerable amount of
time in every corporation. The financial market has emerged as a place
where debt, cash, and financial assets are exchanged; thus, the financial
market is a system encompassing a set of financial transactions that are
traded and embraces all organizations that act as financial intermediaries,
directly or indirectly. Moreover, financial markets are incorporating a
procedure under which financial assets are traded professionally, cost-
effectively transferring financial resources from surplus sectors to sectors
with medium and long-term financial deficits, manifesting several benefits
for borrowers and investors. Also, financial markets handle securities, other
than the monetary market, and informatics allow dealing from outside the
market through brokerage firms spread across different states owing to the
globalization of financial activity and the merger of capital markets.
Additionally, financial markets deal with the management of funds as a key
function in economic growth, having an impact on individual wealth,
companies, consumers, and on economic flows.

Has AI caused financial market disruption? It is characteristic that the
running of the financial markets is interconnected with business activities
since one of the roles of banks and financial institutions is to offer access to
the capital required by corporations and individuals. Consequently,
financial markets are under the influencing powers of digitalization and
“globalization.” Also, corporations are seeking financing outside the
banking sector, while the transformation of the business environment in
financial markets is ongoing. It is worth noting that the financial market
disorder is associated with the aftereffects of digital disruption for
businesses and individuals, resulting in the direct and indirect spread of
digital disruption to finance as a role and industry. To that extent, the arrival
of electronic platforms has empowered numerous new activities such as the
financing of corporations.99 Which is the role of AI in financial markets? AI
will offer the data and predictions about the development and functioning of
financial markets, allowing an objective approach, spotting any instances of
corruption, and preventing crimes such as insider trading and money
laundering.
It has to be taken into account that financial markets activate financial
resources, directing them toward investment with the purpose of motivating
financial operations and advancing their prospective returns. Revolutions in
capital market technology have transpired at the level of the technologies
and financial instruments available in the financial market, which have
globalized in a manner that boosts the flow of capital and the global capital
market integration. Also, financial markets’ effective and resourceful
character is grounded in their capability to enlarge the size of the market by
reinforcing their institutional and regulatory structure in order to exploit the
benefits and drop the risks of financial liberalization, predominantly capital
account liberalization and the integration of global financial markets.
As mentioned earlier, digitization is the process of transforming
information from analogue to digital format, such as paper letters to email
communications, or paper receipts to digital receipts, and so corporations
keep better control of business activity and the capability of starting some
basic automation. Moreover, startups emphasize the point that technology
entails a solid business model or a disruptive transformation so as to
engross all the prospective automation effectiveness and growth capabilities

leading to digitalization, where corporations align and digitally transform
their business model. Hence, digitalization is altering people’s ways of
searching for and buying products and services due to the fact that digital
platforms100 are fundamentally transforming the people’s interaction. Also,
digitalization offers businesses new modes to grow, reach prospective
customers, and expand into new markets globally. The use of Chatbots,
WhatsApp, Instagram, and other digital platforms has become common in
B2B101 relationships, and so there is a move in customer behavior, a
transformation in technology, and an alteration in the market. Hence,
corporations must keep up and learn about their customers’ emerging
habits. To this extent, the digital platforms have started a global rivalry,
which means that if one firm fails to meet expectations, the customer finds
other routes.
It is characteristic that corporations optimize their current business
models in order to build up new products, services, and so achieving
efficiency and flexibility. It has to be seen that optimizing short-term
profitability does not automatically guarantee optimum shareholder returns
in the long run. Consequently, data analytics, cognitive systems, AI, data-
based business models, and platforms are used to stimulate growth.
It has to be taken into account that in order to be valuable, financial
control systems have to mirror a corporation’s strategies and objectives.
Management control systems should encourage managers and other
employees to use maximum effort through a sort of monetary and
nonmonetary rewards.
2.8 Metaverse and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs)
It has to be taken into account that the integration of AI with VR and AR
