Chapter 6
Data Science and Big Data
Over the last decade, there has been a lot of hype about data
science and big data. The hype has resulted in much excitement
and has encouraged many students, researchers, academicians,
and organizations to get interested in this subject.
Organizations have become interested in using data science to
reduce ineﬃciencies and generate growth. Students,
researchers, and professionals have become interested in
learning data science due to the exciting work in this subject.
This also has created new career opportunities and new job
titles such as “data scientists” and “data engineers.” The Google
Trends chart in Figure 6.1 indicates this hype. The trend clearly
shows the increased interest in these search terms since 2014:
data science, machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, deep
learning and big data.1 Furthermore, the trend has been rising
recently and clearly, and search queries on “Machine Learning”
have surpassed other terms and clearly show the increasing
public interest. However, it would be unfair to say that all that
the research in this domain has been carried out in last few
years. Most of the research and algorithms in data science have
resulted from decades of work by statisticians, mathematicians,
and scientists.
The recent increase in the use of data science and machine
learning algorithms is due to the availability of data and high
computing power:
–Availability of data has increased usage of digital devices
and services, and the rise in usage of sensors technology and
connected objects has led to the generation of more and
more data. Moreover, cheaper storage is available to collect
and store the data.
–High computing power has become available at a low cost to
process big datasets and use these complex algorithms.2
Figure 6.1: Google Trends, 2004–2018
In the midst of all this hype, there is a lot of confusion within
this topic due to considerable noise in the literature. Many
people get lost in the maze of terms like data science, machine
learning, deep learning, and big data and do not know where to
start. This chapter aims to clear up this confusion by providing
a concise overview of data science and big data for business
practitioners and discussing some commonly faced questions
such as What are data science, big data, AI, machine learning?
What are the applications of data science used in industry?
Moreover, what are the learnings and challenges of data science
projects? We introduce some basic data science concepts and
big data tools, and discuss the typical data science project
lifecycle in an organization.
Applications of Data Science and Big Data
Data science and big data are ﬁrmly embedded today in a lot of
products and services that meet our daily needs. Some common
examples of everyday applications of data science and big data
include
–Biometrics, such as face and ﬁngerprint recognition, for
unlocking phones using our faces or ﬁnger
–Matching drivers and commuters to simplify booking rides
using taxi or other ride apps
–Recommendations for watching videos and shopping on e-
commerce websites
–Targeting, such as product advertisements based on search
engine history
The exciting part is that most of these products have come into
existence within the past one to two decades and have become
a part of our daily routines. Such widespread use of data
science has arguably led tech companies such as Google,
Facebook, Amazon, Netﬂix, and others to proliferate and
disrupt existing businesses, and to create new products and
experiences for their customers.
Now, let us illustrate in more detail some industry use cases
where data science and big data are used and have proven to
be successful:
–Promotional emails and digital ads: On a typical day, people
are contacted by several promotional email messages, SMS
messages, or ads for things such as hotel discounts, airline
vouchers, and shopping discounts. Sometimes, these
promotional messages are targeted explicitly to speciﬁc
customers. With the advent of the internet, companies have
been gathering and storing extensive data related to their
customers, such as customer demographics, past purchases,
browsing patterns, and aﬄuence level. They use this data to
understand the characteristics of their customers and build
machine learning models based on those characteristics to
identify the likelihood of a customer responding to a
particular ad at a given moment. Depending on this
likelihood, customers are contacted with the right oﬀers and
in many cases even personalized oﬀers. This helps
companies increase their sales by cross-selling and up-
selling and also improve customer experience and
engagement.
–Recommendation engines: Everyday, we come across
various recommendation engines, such as for friends on
Facebook, videos on YouTube, products on Amazon, and
movies on Netﬂix. These systems show personalized
oﬀerings to people based on factors like their search
histories and preferences. It is widely known that Amazon
uses recommendation algorithms to personalize the
shopping experience for each customer. Customers see
recommended items that are based on their previous
browsing behavior, product ratings, similar product
purchases and other factors.3 Along similar lines, Netﬂix
recommends personalized content (movies and TV shows)
based on a user’s viewing history and ratings, the viewing
history of similar users, and so forth. Furthermore, these
recommendations are diverse, include new releases, and
adapt with time in response to changing user preferences.4
–Risk management: Banks and credit card companies have
used credit scores to evaluate loan or credit card
applications for many years. Credit scores typically indicate
the risk level of a customer, such as the likelihood of a
customer to default. The model takes into consideration
several parameters, such as payment history, length of credit
history, inquiries, and income, to predict a customer’s
likelihood to default by comparing them to similar
characteristics of other customers who have defaulted in the
past.5
–Fraud detection: Fraud does not have a constant pattern.
Fraud detection model is an evolving process, and by
investigating and ﬂagging more and more frequent cases,
cases of fraud can be identiﬁed. In the case of credit card
companies, investigating a large number of transactions one
by one is not possible. Therefore, fraud detection models are
used that can auto-approve legitimate transactions and raise
alerts in case of any transactions that appear fraudulent.
Events such as a sudden big purchase after many small
purchases, purchases that do not ﬁt the cardholder’s proﬁle,
and unusual geographical locations can raise suspicion and
block the transaction or card automatically.
What Is Data Science?
The term “data science” has been ﬂoating in various literature,
journals and lecture notes for many years. In 1962, John Tukey,
in his paper “The Future of Data Analysis,” pointed to the
existence of an unrecognized “science” that dealt with the
subject of learning from the data.6 Later in 2001, William S.
Cleveland from Bell Labs proposed to expand the ﬁeld of
statistics to data analysis by emphasizing the importance of
data preparation, computation, and presentation rather than
statistical modeling.7 However, the term “data science” gained
widespread popularity more recently in 2012 through a
Harvard Business Review article “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job
of the 21st Century.”8 In academia or industry, there is no single
approved deﬁnition of data science because it is a broad term
encompassing many domains, which leads to diﬀerent views
and ambiguity.
However, in simple terms, one can understand data science
as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that uses the concepts of statistics,
mathematics, computer science, and domain expertise to
extract meaningful insights from data that can generate some
business value. A data scientist is someone who is a specialist in
these three domains and extracts meaning from the data by
performing data and statistical analysis; building and applying
machine learning models and algorithms; and visualizing,
summarizing and communicating the results. Figure 6.2
describes a data scientist with skills from these three domains.
In reality, it is hard to ﬁnd someone who is a perfect data
scientist—highly skilled in all three domains. Therefore,
organizations build data science teams with people of
complementary skillsets.
The terms, “business analytics” and “data analytics” have
been used popularly over the years and are often confused with
data science. Overall, there is a blurred diﬀerence between
analytics and data science, and therefore these terms are
sometimes used interchangeably. Our interpretation of this
blurred diﬀerence is that the role of a business/ data analyst
involves using a lot of domain expertise and data analysis to
generate insights from the data, whereas the role of a data
scientist is slightly broader and includes machine learning
modeling and programming. In many cases, the responsibilities
of a data scientist also include data analysis, building models
and developing those models into products or services.
Source: Drew Conway’s Data Science Venn Diagram. [Online]. Available: htt
p://drewconway.com/zia/2013/3/26/the-data-science-venn-diagramce:
Figure 6.2: Data scientist Venn diagram
Machine Learning vs. Artificial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a ﬁeld of computer science focused
on making computers more intelligent so that they can imitate
intelligent human behavior. AI is a medium to enable
computers to learn and engage in human-like thought
processes, such as learning, reasoning and self-correction.
Traditionally, this involved hard-coding knowledge about the
world in the form of computer programs, but success was
limited because most human knowledge grows with
experiences and is subjective, intuitive and challenging to
articulate using a set of rules. The introduction of machine
learning enabled computers to learn real-world knowledge by
identifying patterns from the data, self-correction from this
learning process to enable decision making [9]. However,
machine learning algorithms also suﬀered from a trade-oﬀ as
their performance was dependent on how data was presented
to them. Deep learning algorithms solved this problem by
extracting information by itself. Deep learning is a particular
type of machine learning that makes the computer learning
more powerful, ﬂexible and abstract. The Venn diagram in Figu
re 6.3 illustrates how these concepts are interrelated.
Source: Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Deep Learning, The
MIT Press, 2016
Figure 6.3: AI, machine learning, and deep learning Venn diagram
What Data Science Is Not
AI, machine learning, and deep learning do not comprise a
branch of data science. Rather, data science uses them to solve
problems. Consider machine learning as a statistical toolkit that
helps machines learn based on historical data and make
predictions on the new data. On the other hand, data science is
a broader term that includes the process for building this
machine learning model, including data collection, data
processing, data analysis, data visualization, modeling, making
predictions, and so forth.
Big data also is not a branch of data science. Data science
can be used to solve problems using various types and sizes of
datasets.
What Is Big Data?
The origin of the term “big data” is still ambiguous, but one of
the early and popular deﬁnitions is that big data is the amount
of data that traditional database software tools cannot manage
and analyze due to the complexity and size.9 In simple terms,
big data means large data, where large depends on the context
and computational processing power. According to a report by
IBM in 2013, about 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created each
day in the world.10 The pace of creation is only accelerating
with the growth of internet access, increase in mobile usage,
and IoT (internet of things) devices around the world. Data
points are created in our daily activities, such as:
–Social media activity (Twitter tweets and messages;
Facebook likes, shares and messages)
–Search engine activity (Google searches, creating web pages)
–Video streaming (watching or uploading videos on YouTube
or Netﬂix)
–Payments (using credit cards, internet banking)
To make any use of this data, it needs to be captured. In the
past, data storage was quite expensive and ineﬃcient, so
storing big datasets was a challenge. Now, there are better and
more economical data storage solutions that make it easier to
store and process the data.
IBM deﬁned big data in association with four Vs: volume
(size of the data), velocity (speed at which the data is created,
stored, analyzed and visualized), variety (diﬀerent data sources
for structured and unstructured data), and veracity
(trustworthiness of the data for any analysis in terms of
accuracy and ambiguity, for example).11 Other researchers have
deﬁned big data as three Vs, six Vs and so on. Although there
are several critiques of the V model, one thing is clear: there is a
lot of data available that can be used for solving numerous
business problems using data science.
Data Science and Big Data in Industry Practice
The key steps required in any data science project are shown in
Figure 6.4. Regardless of the problem, any data science project
can be deployed by following these steps. The multi-step
lifecycle, from deﬁning the problem to experimentation, is
explained in this section. The big data technology stack used in
this process, and also shown in Figure 6.4, is explained in the
section “Big Data Technology Stack.”
Figure 6.4: Data science project lifecycle
Step 1—Defining the Problem
Before starting to work on a data science task, the ﬁrst step is to
deﬁne the objective of the business problem clearly. This
involves answering questions about diﬀerent aspects of the
problem, such as
–What is the business problem and how to translate it into a
data science problem?
–What data is required for the problem and how to collect
and to prepare it?
–What insights can be generated from the data and what
machine learning/deep learning models can be useful for the
problem?
–How to build and evaluate the model, deﬁne success (KPIs,
metrics, and so on) for the solution of the problem?
–How to measure the impact of a machine learning model in
the real world?
In practice, it is essential to simplify and structure the problem
at this stage and precisely answer these questions. Depending
on how the problem is structured at this step, the subsequent
steps of data collection, data preparation modeling, model
evaluation and experimentation can be diﬀerent. This is
illustrated using the following example over the course of the
chapter:
Loan Delinquency Problem
A bank has disbursed personal loans to 800,000 existing
savings/credit card customers over the last ﬁve years (2013–
2018). This loan scheme was expected to help customers and
