capabilities:
The analyzer for organizational structure: this utility looks at the
organizational job descriptions and classifies employees into internal
controls specific roles. The data mined are the job descriptions,
departments names, people, titles, etc. A separate analysis of
organization can also show power flows, influence, and informal social
links (Fire and Puzis, 2016)
The analyzer also looks at the chart versus actual authority structure.
The chart authority structure is as represented in the organizational
charts and subject to the reporting relationships. The actual authority
structure is determined based upon analyzing the social networks from
emails, texts, and other information. The social hierarchy can be
determined from machine learning by analyzing the emails (Rowe et
al., 2007).
Financial Reporting Competencies
The financial reporting competencies can be obtained by understating the
educational background, experience, and type of education.
The training data set for competency includes the typical HR data, as well
as data from resumes, LinkedIn, and other social media data. It also
includes data from the number of publications by the person, involvement
in various professional societies, trainings, and certifications.
This artifact can be designed two ways. The first approach is to use HR data
from a larger data set (which might include data from multiple companies)
and have a human apply labels to the data. The label in this case will be
applied to learn the competence levels for a position. Factors such as years
on the job, educational background, experience, etc., will be the input data
set. Valuable information can be extracted from resumes (Reza and Zaman,
2017). The ‘y’ or output variable will be competent versus incompetent for
a given job.
The second and more interesting artifact uses the data set of input variables
including experience, years on the job, educational background from an
actual data set of frauds and failure in that position. While interesting, it

will be hard to reconstruct a data set for training purposes since it will be
hard to pinpoint the blame for a failure.
Authority and Responsibility
Authority and responsibility are assessed by using various intelligent
automation technologies. We are trying to assess whether management
assigned the responsibility of internal controls appropriately and the
employees were given the appropriate controls and authority to ensure that
internal controls are in place and effective. There are several ways to assess
that from the machine learning perspective.
The first is to have an agent that uses the human resources data to
understand the job responsibilities. The data collection can also extend to
the annual employee review and evaluation forms that typically contain
more detailed accounts of actual work undertaken by employees. In
addition, emails and communications can also be used as the data input. The
model uses natural language processing to evaluate if, given the role of the
individual, his or her responsibility structure includes references to
position‐specific internal controls. Notice that in this assessment, we are
only evaluating the environment and not the activities. Therefore, our focus
remains on studying the environment of the organization.
While responsibility is assessed using the above, analyzing authority is a
whole different ballgame. Authority manifests in enabling a manager or
employee to conduct themselves in the proper manner, not enforcing
improper or unnecessary constraints, assuring employees that there will no
negative consequences when employees file a complaint or become a
whistleblower.
Authority is a function of being able to act upon what a person has been
made responsible for. In corporate systems, access is provided to
individuals by a workflow that records the person who authorized the
access. Logs from that system can show if the authorization is being done at
the right level and being done by the person who has the authority to do it,
or by someone higher up in the organization, or by more than one person.
The culture can provide an indirect proxy for authority assessment. More
authoritative leaders will be less inclined to allow people to function
independently, even when it comes to such an important role as internal

controls. Finally, internal emails, meeting notes, and communications
provide excellent data for assessing the level of authority key employees
have. In advanced settings both video and speech can be used to study the
cultural dynamics of a firm. To accomplish that level of automation, process
mining and machine learning are used, and their applications are explained
later in this chapter.
Human Resource Policies and Practices
Large data sets are available and can be mined in human resources (Jia et
al., 2018). The objective of control environment assessment with respect to
HR is to determine whether the department is aware of the underlying
concepts of separation of duties, internal controls, and hiring the right talent
to mitigate the risks. The policies and practices of HR can be analyzed
using natural language processing and the usage of key terms (separation of
duties, etc.) can be assessed to develop insights into HR capabilities.
Similar concepts, as discussed above, are applied to determine the
capability and contribution of the HR department in supporting stronger
internal controls.
AUTOMATED RISK ASSESSMENT
Automated risk assessment was extensively covered in the previous chapter
from an inherent risk perspective. We recognized that there are at least four
automated methods to explore risk in an organization. The first method
focused on the account‐ and assertion‐specific risk identification and
management. The three remaining methods, shadow/parallel accounting,
strategic objectives, and deep learning, can be used for any type of risk
management capability development. In fact, in our case, COSO framework
requires management to understand risks from the perspective of achieving
company's objectives. The COSO 2013 framework outlines the four
principles of risk assessment:
1. The organization specifies objectives with sufficient clarity to enable
the identification and assessment of risks relating to objectives.
2. The organization identifies risks to the achievement of its objectives
across the entity and analyzes the risks as a basis for determining how

the risks should be managed.
3. The organization considers the potential for fraud in assessing risks to
the achievement of objectives.
4. The organization identifies and assesses changes that could
significantly impact the system of internal control.
In this chapter we will expand on the model presented in inherent risk
evaluation and include risk assessment from an internal control perspective,
and also introduce the concept of event‐based risk assessment.
The process is composed of four levels of automation:
Level 1: Outside‐in – Get a general idea about potential material
weakness in internal controls (MWIC) by using publicly available
information. This gives auditors a sense of how risky a client situation
might turn out to be.
Level 2: Process centric – Understand the risk relationship between
processes and controls.
Level 3: Enterprise – Develop greater insights into the value chain
and business processes of the organization. This is similar to
enterprise‐based risk analysis frameworks.
Level 4: Business decisions – Auditors do not consider this to be part
of their jobs; however, as the opening case study of PwC settling two
lawsuits shows, there is a growing movement to place that
responsibility on auditors. The reasoning behind that is clear. The
economic consequences of management decisions and objectives flow
through the financial systems and the stakeholders expect auditors to
understand and evaluate such realities of business. The consequences
of management business decisions can also become the motivation
factors to conduct fraud. In other cases, management decisions impact
the future cash flows and the cost of capital of a firm and therefore
impact the valuation of many current assets.

Level 1: Outside‐In Analysis
A group of researchers wanted to explore if it is possible to identify material
weaknesses in internal controls from using publicly available external data
(Simsek et al., 2018). Looking at various companies that announced
material weakness in internal controls, the group identified financial data
from historical financial statements one year prior to the disclosure. Using
that data – data that included financial ratios such as total asset turnover,
profitability, capital intensity, size, current ratio, and operating performance
– the research team tried to predict the internal control weaknesses. After
applying various methods, the team was able to obtain 70 to 80% accuracy
in results. This means that the team was able to predict, with reasonable
accuracy, that material weakness exists in internal controls only by using
the historical financial data. A similar artifact can be deployed to identify
such weaknesses in companies.
In fact, given today's technology advances, the predictive power of such an
artifact can be significantly enhanced by adding features and using a deep
learning environment.
Level 2: Process Centric
As we move beyond our Level 1 analysis, we can go a level deeper to
determine if the primary processes in a firm carry greater risk. This
evaluation is a function of feature data obtained from historical records of
internal control problems. For instance, a data set that contains the
examples of prior misstatements or disclosures of internal control
weaknesses can be used to identify the presence of MWIC by industries,
companies, and process types. At least two types of machine learning
methods can be deployed to develop insights into process‐centric MWIC.
The first approach is similar to the one by Simsek et al., discussed in the
previous section, except that instead of using financial and operational
performance data as feature inputs, we use industries, company types,
business model descriptions, and processes to understand the likelihood of
MWIC.
The second approach borrows from methods developed in studying human
errors in accidents. The study of human errors in accidents has significant
literature. In 1998, Hollnagel authored a book titled Cognitive Reliability

and Error Analysis Method (Hollnagel, 1998). In that book he developed
three taxonomies. The first was the taxonomy of technology, in which he
pointed out the problems that can afflict machines (e.g., equipment failure,
procedure failure, interface failure). The second taxonomy was of “man,”
implying the cognitive problems that can afflict a human (e.g., planning,
execution, memory, interpretation, observation). The third taxonomy was of
the organization, including the failure points in an organization (e.g.,
training, working conditions). Hollnagel presented a Cognitive Reliability
and Error Analysis Method (CREAM), which shifted the focus from the
task characteristics and on a hypothetical inherent human error probability,
to the principle that context is the driving force behind Human Reliability
(R. Moura et al., 2015). Moura, Beer, Patelli, Lewis, and Knoll identified
the importance of the principle and expanded upon that to use a major
accidents data set, applying a clustering technique (unsupervised) to
classify the data to discover various causes of accidents. They used self‐
organizing maps (SOMs) to cluster and classify data (Moura et al., 2015;
Moura et al., 2017). The SOM technique also enables multidimensional
data to be viewed in a two-dimensional representation (Kohonen, 2013).
Similar to what Moura, Beer, Patelli, Lewis, and Knoll (2015) did,
SOM/Clustering can be applied to understand the drivers of MWIC.
Level 3: Value Chain and Enterprise Risk Relationships
We covered a risk management process in Chapter 7. By understanding the
value chain relationships and enterprise‐centric risk, we develop insights
into potential problems that may arise in situations where external parties
are involved (e.g., sales and procurement). Developing those insights helps
give auditors an idea about potential deterioration in value of assets (e.g.,
knowledge about a major customer going bankrupt will impact the AR held
by the client firm).
The enterprise risk management process is composed of the following
processes: identify risks, develop assessment criteria, assess risks, assess
risk interactions, prioritize risks, and respond to risks (Curtis and Carey,
2012). The use of AI in the risk management process automates the process
flow of risk management.

Level 4: Business Decisions Analysis
This area of risk analysis is critical to improve audit quality and to help
develop a deeper, more insightful perspective for auditors. The automation
in this case follows the standard approach of understanding the enterprise
risk. There are established methods and approaches for identifying,
measuring, and managing enterprise risks.
Technology Design
Before presenting the methodology to accomplish that goal, it is important
to understand the two types of data critical for performing the control
activity analysis. The first is the transactional data. This is the regular data
we use to perform analysis and includes data from databases such as sales,
accounting, and procurement. The second type of data, known as metadata,
is the data about the data – for example, computer's log data about
transactions. Metadata captures things like who accessed the system, when
an entry was made, or what changes took place.
Control activities review is based upon three types of analysis: data‐centric
and metadata‐centric and data + metadata‐centric. To appreciate the power
of automation, it is important to recognize that automated evaluation of
control activities ties directly to the risk review done in the previous
section, as well as actual audit procedures. Even though we presented the
total audit automation model as a linear model, a machine, unlike humans,
doesn't need the process transition nodes and can instead perform all
processes simultaneously.
Metadata‐Centric Analysis
Process‐specific analysis is a growing area of audit automation. The advent
of process‐mining technology was a transformational step for conducting
risk evaluation using event log data. Analytical methods are applied to
extract insights from the log data to understand audit‐related patterns. The
data extracted from event logs includes information about which system
was accessed, when, and by whom. This is known as the activity, routing,
and resource information. Process mining is rules‐based extraction of data.
This information is used to capture the audit evidence to determine factors
such as