selection? Self-selection occurs if participants are allowed to choose which group (or treatment) they
want to be part of. For instance, if we design an A/B test for video games to find out which color of the
visual interface is more immersive (e.g., blue vs. green) and let participants choose to play using their
choice of color , then the experimental design is not randomized because we are allowing participants to
self-select  their experimental group based on color preference.
14.5 USING A/B TESTING TO TEST GAMING PROTOTYPES
For this chapter let’ s use the example of a video game company . GameV has been working on a new
game idea that its designers believe will be more immersive and engaging than other games that
GameV currently has developed. However , before they launch the game, GameV designers have
generated several prototypes of the game so they can launch the version that is likely to retain the most
players. They know from previous data in the gaming industry that every point of engagement in the
game results in players who will return. For instance, many players don’t return after the first session
because of glitchy install or because of game features that are less than immersive. Therefore, GameV
wants to use A/B testing to assess specific features. The game lets players earn an extra life by
performing some tasks. GameV has determined three levels of dif ficulty: 25, 35, and 45. They want to
find out which level of dif ficulty results in greater engagement. It is possible that if players have earned a
life by performing a dif ficult task, it could result in their feeling more engaged. Alternatively , it is possible
that earning a life with a more dif ficult task results in players giving up. Hence, GameV wants to find out
which dif ficulty level engages more players in this game environment. One can think of the three levels
of dif ficulty as low , medium, and high.
GameV believes that a good outcome metric to figure out the success of the prototype is the time
players spend playing. Since the game is a prototype, players have never played it before, and the time
they spend playing the game will help GameV determine which of the prototypes results in greatest
engagement and immersion. The outcome variable (unlike in Chapter 7 ) is continuous in nature.
Therefore, we will use an F test to find out which level of dif ficulty results in highest immersiveness.
14.5.1 Experimental Design
GameV has developed the three prototypes in such a way that each prototype is designed with one of
the three levels of dif ficulty . Each prototype of fers unique game features that correspond to its specific
difficulty level, providing players with a variety of experiences. In the experimental design, the level of
difficulty is the only factor that varies across the three prototypes, with specific levels set at 25, 35, and
45. Every other feature of the game stays the same; only the features associated with the level of
difficulty are dif ferent. Moreover , during A/B testing, a player who plays prototype-25 will not be playing
prototype-35 or prototype-45. That is, one player will see and play only one game prototype. Such a
design is called a one-factor , between-participants design . GameV followed the usual steps to run its
A/B test:
1. It recruited 1,200 video game players who agreed to test the game in return for free games from
GameV . Hence, the sample for the A/B test is 1,200.
2. It randomly assigned about 400 players to each of the three groups: prototype-25, prototype-35,
and prototype-45.
3. Players played the game for 10 rounds, during which they were presented with the dif ficulty level
specific to their group. They could continue to play after 10 rounds for another 2 rounds, or they
could quit and leave.
4. Time played was recorded for each participant and served as a measure (also called a proxy) for
immersiveness and engagement with the game.
5. The null hypothesis would be that changing the dif ficulty level would not influence the
immersiveness, resulting in no dif ference in the time spent playing among players in the three
groups.
14.5.2 Analyzing the Data and Presenting the Results
Before we determine what analysis needs to be run, we first should examine the nature of the data. If
the data are normally distributed , then we can go ahead and use parametric tests such as an F test or t
test. However , if the data are not normally distributed, this failure of the normality assumption might
require the use of nonparametric tests like the Mann-Whitney .
14.5.3 F Test
The F test, also called the F statistic, is used to describe tests that use the F distribution to determine
whether a factor has a significant  influence on the outcome variable. When we use an F test for A/B
testing, we want to examine whether the intervention we have used in each of the groups results in
different values of the outcome. In our A/B test, we want to examine whether the three levels of dif ficulty
result in dif ferent levels of immersion as measured through time spent playing the game prototype. The
null hypothesis states that there is no dif ference in time spent playing across the three levels of dif ficulty .
We can reject the null hypothesis only if there is a dif ference in playing time. When we use an F test, we
are comparing the groups to test whether there are variances among the groups. Hence, an F test is
frequently used for analysis of variance (ANOV A) testing, which is a common test for causal
experimentation.
The F test can be performed if the data follow an F distribution and the group data are independent. In
A/B testing, group data are obtained independently because the intervention for one group is dif ferent
from the intervention for the other groups. Note, when we use an F test for correlational analysis, the
assumption is that the predictors have an independent influence on the outcome variable. For our
example, we have three levels of one factor—that is, three independent groups with no interaction (we
will discuss interactions later). Hence, our A/B test design will examine the main ef fect, which is the
effect of each of the groups on the outcome.
The three main ef fects for prototype-25, prototype-35, and prototype-45 constitute the model equation.
SSM=SS25+SS35+SS45
The sum of squares  (SSM) captures how much variance is explained by each of the factors. For
instance, SS25 indicates how much variation in the immersiveness experienced by players is captured
by a dif ficulty level of 25. Here, we have only one factor but with three levels. However , along with SS
we need something called degrees of freedom  (df) to calculate the F test.
dfM=k−1wherek= number of experimental groups (herek= 3)
14.5.4 Testing Statistical Difference
Imagine we ran the A/B test and obtained data for each of the three conditions. Assume that mean
(average) time spent with prototype-35 is higher than the averages of time spent with prototype-25 and
prototype-45. How can we quantify that prototype-35 is indeed more immersive? The only way we can
answer this is by testing if the averages are statistically dif ferent. The testing process begins with the
hypothesis that there is no dif ference in the averages across conditions; this serves as the null
hypothesis. It implies that all prototypes are equally immersive. Now our goal is to test this hypothesis. A
one-way ANOV A makes it possible to simultaneously compare the averages of more than two conditions
and determine if they are statistically dif ferent. ANOV A is a generalization of the t test that compares the
means of two conditions.
Traditional ANOV A (also known as the ANOV A F test) makes the following assumptions.
Independence : The observations should be independent of each other . This implies that
participants providing responses in each condition are unique and that no participant is included in
more than one condition. The assumption of independence is related to the design of the study . If
participants are randomly assigned to only one of the conditions and do not influence or get
influenced by other participants, then this assumption is met.
Homogeneity of V ariance : This assumption requires that variance (spread of values around the
average) among groups should be similar . In our case, the variance of the outcome variable, time
spent on the app, should be similar in each of the conditions.
Normal Distribution : The population of all the respondents (players) from which the sample was
drawn is normally distributed. In the context of GameV’ s A/B test, this assumption implies that the
time spent by all the users ( note:  all users, not only those in our sample) of the game follows a bell-
shaped distribution. Some users will spend a lot of time and some less time, but the majority of
users’  time will spread around the average.
The use of an ANOV A is not recommended if the independence assumption is violated, although
sometimes an ANOV A is used despite violation of the normality assumption since an ANOV A can still
perform reasonably well if a large sample size is used. However , the assumption of homogeneity of
variance tends to be frequently violated in many real-world datasets. In fact, assuming unequal
variances might be a more realistic approach when working with real-world datasets.2 Therefore,
assuming unequal variance, it is advisable to use W elch’s ANOV A as it does not assume homogeneity
of variance.
The output of W elch’s ANOV A will provide an estimate of p value. Let’ s understand what p value means.
It is the probability of observing the obtained results if the null hypothesis was actually true. In the
context of our A/B test, it is the probability of wrongly concluding that the group means are not the same
(i.e., rejecting the null hypothesis) when they are actually the same (i.e., the null hypothesis is true). W e
want to reduce the probability of such wrong conclusions; thus, smaller p values are preferred. The
convention is to set the threshold p value at 0.05; if the estimated p value is less than 0.05, then we can
conclude that the averages are statistically dif ferent.
If the results of W elch’s ANOV A show that the averages across all conditions are not the same, then the
next step is to ask the following questions: Which conditions are dif ferent, and how do they dif fer? Post
hoc pairwise comparisons help us answer these questions. Given the frequent violation of the
homogeneity of variance assumption, it is advisable to use the Games-Howell method for pairwise
comparison, which allows unequal variance in pairwise comparisons.
We will follow these steps closely in the next sections when we analyze the A/B test for GameV .
14.6 USING THE A/B TEST IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
We first import data and create a boxplot. The data are hypothetical and created for the purposes of this
chapter .
We see from Table 14.1  and Figure 14.2  that the average time players spent with prototype-35 is higher
than with either prototype-25 or prototype-45. Having obtained this result, we need to determine if the
average time spent is statistically dif ferent across conditions.
condition count mean min sd
Prototype_25 195 46.52970 11.174987 15.06432
Prototype_35 175 51.23371      9.062043 16.61373
condition count mean min sd
Prototype_45 185 47.41703 18.099590 10.65673
Description
Figure 14.2  A Boxplot of Time Spent With Dif ferent Prototypes
The first step is to test if our data satisfies the normality assumption by performing the Shapiro–Wilk
normality test.
Across all the conditions, we see that the p value is more than 0.05 (see Table 14.2 ). This shows that
our data do not violate the assumption of normality .
condition variable statistic p
Prototype_25 time 0.9922398 0.3874756
Prototype_35 time 0.9895805 0.2286476
Prototype_45 time 0.9913752 0.3363401
The second step tests the homogeneity of variance assumption. W e use Levene’ s test for homogeneity
of variance across groups. The null hypothesis of this test states that variances in the three groups are
the same (i.e., they are not significantly dif ferent).
The obtained p value is less than 0.05, so the null hypothesis is rejected (see Table 14.3 ). We can
conclude that our data do not meet the assumption of homogeneity of variance. As we discussed earlier ,
the ideal method when the assumption of homogeneity of variance is violated is Welch’s ANOV A. W e
implement it next.
df1 df2 statistic p
2 552 14.29075 9e-07
The p value of W elch’s ANOV A is less than 0.05 (see Table 14.4 ). This shows that the means across the
three conditions are not the same. In order to find out how they dif fer across conditions, we use the
Games-Howell test. It compares means across all possible combinations of conditions and tests if the
differences between conditions are statistically significant or not.
.y.n statistic DFn DFd p method
time 555 4.51 2 350.8273 0.012 Welch ANOV A
The results show that prototype-35 players spent statistically more time with the game than both
prototype-25 and prototype-45 players (see Table 14.5 ).
.y.group1 group2 estimate conf.low conf.high p.adj p.adj.signif
time Prototype_25 Prototype_35    4.7040084    0.8073325    8.6006842 0.013 *
time Prototype_25 Prototype_45    0.8873367 -2.2508397    4.0255130 0.784 ns
time Prototype_35 Prototype_45 -3.8166717 -7.3036038 -0.3297396 0.028 *
14.6.1 Insights Derived From the A/B Test
Given the finding that prototype-35 results in greater immersiveness than prototype-25 and prototype-
45, the insights we can draw are quite informative. The results indicate that for lower levels of dif ficulty
(prototype-25), players do not find the game immersive. However , as the dif ficulty level increases to
prototype-35, immersiveness increases. At this point, GameV might have wrongfully concluded that
increasing dif ficulty will always increase immersiveness since players feel a greater sense of
achievement when they win more dif ficult games. Hence, including prototype-45 was informative since it
indicated that its increased level of dif ficulty resulted in lowered immersiveness. The results clearly
indicate that as dif ficulty increases, immersiveness increases initially , peaks at a certain level, and then
starts to decrease. In other words, the results seem to follow an inverted- U shape. Therefore, GameV
can now identify what level of dif ficulty should be retained to obtain the maximum immersiveness.
The A/B test we ran had one factor with multiple levels and no interactions. Interaction occurs when an
experimental design has two factors (or independent variables) and we want to find the combined (or
interactive) influence of the two factors on the outcome variable. Of course, there can be more than two
factors; in that case, we would be examining the interactive influence of three or four factors on the
outcome. However , the more factors we include in an experimental design, the larger and more
complicated the design becomes, requiring that each factor ’s interactive influence be examined on the
