also bring additional revenue to the bank; however an
investigation revealed that the scheme resulted in losses to the
bank. The loan is supposed to be repaid in the form of monthly
installments—where the installment amount and number of
installments depend on the loan amount, loan tenure and
agreed interest rate. When the bank is unable to debit any
monthly installments for a month from the bank account, the
loan is considered to be “delinquent.”
Since 2013, the delinquency rate is ~10 percent, or 1 out of
10 customers missed on their payment, but customers are
charged with a hefty fee in case of any missed installment
leading to dissatisfaction. The probability of missing payment is
not yet considered in any risk management/account
management decisions in the bank, which if considered can
enhance the performance of savings/ credit card portfolio as
well. Given this information, bank management has requested
that its data science team identify customers who are most
likely to miss payment of the loan installment in next three
months so that these customers receive a telephone reminder.
Bank management believes that such preventive action can
keep some customers from missing payment and wants to test
out this hypothesis. After its success is established, management
would like to make telephone reminders a regular practice. It is
also known that the bank’s call center’s capacity is calling only
30,000 customers per month. Therefore, it is essential to
identify the right customers to call at the right time.
Given this problem statement, what are diﬀerent ways to
structure this problem into a data science problem?
–Objective: The problem involves ﬁnding top 30,000
customers with the highest likelihood to miss payment of
their loan installment in the next three months so that they
can receive telephone reminders. A few ways to approach
this problem are
Approach 1: Identify customers whose account
balance falls below a certain amount, say, two to three
times the amount of monthly loan installment. This
approach might work well; however, it does not take
into account the fluctuations in the account balance
over the month. For example, some customers
routinely pay their installments but have to wait for
their pay to be deposited and might not need to be
called. Can this be further improved?
Approach 2: Analyze the historical characteristics of
customers who have missed payment of their loan
installment in the past and understand the reasons
behind it. For example, customers aged 30-40 years
with income below $2500 per month are more likely
to miss payment than other customers. Such insights
can be used to generate rules to filter the right set of
customers. Can these rules be further improved? Can
these rules be made more robust?
Approach 3: Create a machine learning model using
historical customer behavior and characteristics to
predict a score for the likelihood to miss payment in
the next three months. This score would be specific to
each customer and can change with time.
–Data collection and preparation: To proceed with any of
these approaches, having data about customers who have
missed a payment vs not missed any payment since 2013 can
be useful. This data can be used to study the characteristics,
such as customer account balance history, demographics,
and loan details that can help to understand underlying
reasons for missing payments. The sections “Step 2—Data
Collection” and “Step 3—Data Preparation” describe how to
gather the right data for the problem and various methods
to collect and prepare such data.
–Modeling: In the case of Approach 3, this step can be used to
gauge which machine learning models would be useful for
the given problem. The “Modeling” section describes the
types of machine learning models suitable for diﬀerent
problems and steps needed to build any model.
–Model evaluation: After the machine learning model is built,
it is useful to evaluate its performance. This step is needed to
gauge the performance of the model (how correctly the
model can predict customers with high likelihood to miss
payments in the next three months) before starting to call
those customers.
–Experimentation: Although a model can help identify such
customers who are likely to miss payment in next three
months, it is necessary to test whether the model works in
the real world. Experiments can be carried out to check
model accuracy and the impact of calling. For example,
customers with a high likelihood to miss payment can be
identiﬁed and either called or not called to answer these
questions:
–Does calling customers with a high likelihood of delinquency
actually prevent them from missing their payment?
–Do customers with a high likelihood of delinquency end up
missing their payment when they are not called?
–Do customers with a high likelihood of delinquency end up
missing their payment even after being called?
Answering such questions and analyzing the results can help to
measure the success of the model in the real world. The “Step 5
—Experimentation” section describes how such experiments
can be designed.
Step 2—Data Collection
After precisely deﬁning the problem, the next step is to gather
relevant data for that problem. This is done by following a
systematic approach to gather various data from the variety of
sources to get a complete picture of the problem. The diﬀerent
types of data are discussed below.
Based on the source, data can be mainly categorized into:
primary data and secondary data:
–Primary data is the data that is gathered from the ﬁrst-hand
experiences of a researcher for a speciﬁc project. Usually,
collecting primary data involves a lot of time, eﬀort, and
cost. Examples of primary data include data collected using
questionnaires, interviews, surveys, experiments, and so on.
–Secondary data is the data that was already collected and
recorded in the past for a diﬀerent problem. Usually,
secondary data is readily available, so it is widely used in
data science projects. Examples of secondary data include
private datasets (for example, internal companies’ records),
datasets for sale (such as those available through data
aggregator companies), scraping websites, and public
datasets (like government publications, books, journal
articles, and so forth).
Care should be taken to ensure that data is relevant for the
business problem and captures suﬃcient events of interest.
Both primary and secondary data can be used for a data science
problem, but in most cases, secondary data is used. This is
because secondary data is cheap and provides a longer history,
which includes more data points that could give more insights
even though it is less accurate when compared to primary data.
For the loan delinquency problem, secondary data from
internal bank systems can be used containing details such as:
–Customer demographics (age, gender, income, location)
–Bank account details (number of accounts, tenure of the
bank account, account status—active, inactive, or other)
–Account transaction details (types of transactions, amounts
spend on diﬀerent transactions)
–Loan details (loan status—delinquency, defaults, paid-up, or
other; principal loan amount; outstanding loan amount, the
total number of paid installments, date of delinquency)
–Other data, such as customer interaction details and website
usage
Types of Data
Raw data (including primary and secondary data) is not always
of great quality. The quality of data mainly depends on how the
data is captured, what tools are used to capture it and what
measures are used to ensure the right type. There are mostly
three types in which data is captured, namely structured
datasets, semi-structured datasets and unstructured datasets.
Their diﬀerences are shown in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Differences between Structured, Semi-Structured and Unstructured Data
Traditionally, models have worked well on structured and semi-
structured data but not so well on unstructured data (audio,
images, and patterns in the text). But recent machine learning
and deep learning algorithms are signiﬁcantly better at
interpreting even unstructured data, which has led to many
new exciting applications such as speech recognition, image
recognition, and natural language processing on text. For the
loan delinquency problem, all three types of data can be used
depending on how the data is available in the bank systems. For
example, both customer demographics recorded in structured
databases and customer interactions recorded in the form of
emails or voice recordings can be used.
Levels of Data
Structured data is captured at several levels. In this context, a
“level” is the smallest unit of the data. For example, a
transaction is the smallest level when money is transferred
from one bank account to another. This transaction is captured
as one row in the data. Similarly, a social security number
uniquely represents a person, and one person will have
consistent characteristics, such as gender and place of birth,
associated with this social security number. Therefore, data can
be captured at a person level using the social security number.
On the other hand, for semi-structured and unstructured data,
the levels may or may not be there. For example, unstructured
text or images do have such levels. Table 6.2 illustrates diﬀerent
levels of data capture.
Table 6.2: Levels of Data
Level Each Row Represents Data gathered at each levels
Event One event Data for each event, like the time of a
banking transaction
Entity One user, product
family, or other such
entityFor example, age, gender, demographics,
aggregation of event level data to user
level—customer’s month-end ledger
balance
Segment One segment For example, a list of cities with average
income more than $30,000
Data with more granularity captures more information. For
example, a customer’s daily banking transaction amounts
provide more information about the customer’s transaction
behavior than the total transaction amount for the bank.
Therefore, in the loan delinquency problem, event or user level
data would be more useful than segment level.
Step 3—Data Preparation
After gathering data from various sources, the next step is to
process and transform this data into a useable form for the
analysis. Often data is collected from various sources, so it is
untidy—has inconsistent data types, useful columns spread
across multiple ﬁles, etc. Data preparation involves steps such
as performing quality checks, ﬁltering, and aggregating, joining,
concatenating diﬀerent datasets, creating features so that it can
be used to generate some meaningful insights and further used
for modeling tasks. The ﬁrst step of data preparation is
performing data quality checks. Data collected in the real world
for practical purposes is usually of poor quality—data has
incorrectly captured information, missing values, duplicate
records, and so forth. Therefore, it is essential to perform
quality checks (QCs) on the data and address issues before
proceeding.
Data Quality Checks
The ideal method for performing data quality checks is to check
every record against the source system. But if there is a large
number of records across many ﬁles, such a method can be
cumbersome. Therefore, some pragmatic means are needed to
gauge the quality of the data. Some of the typical measures used
to perform data quality checks include the following:12
–Completeness: Check whether all intended datasets and data
items (ﬁelds, values) are captured. Compare the numbers of
rows, columns, and ﬁelds; the size of the data at the source
data; and the available data to ensure completeness.
–Accuracy: Secondary data is not as accurate as primary data,
but realistically, it should be checked to determine how well
the data represents real-world observations and events.
Therefore, check whether the data was captured accurately:
By reconciling it with third-party source data that is
trustworthy or confirming insights with the business
teams.
By checking for abnormal values in data, such as
values that are too high or too low, or missing or
incorrect values (numerical or categorical). If
abnormal values account for too many of those in a
column, then the result of data analysis can be biased.
Thus, all abnormal values should be treated.
–Uniqueness: Check whether all records are uniquely
captured; that is, there is no duplicate information. Identify
the unique keys of the data (for example, bank account
number or customer ID) and check if the dataset is unique
across these keys. For example—if same customer across
one customer ID has duplicate records then de-duplicate the
data by either removing duplicate rows or aggregating them
to the customer ID level.
–Consistency: Check whether the data is consistent with
diﬀerent representations of the same information across
multiple datasets; that is, there is no diﬀerence between two
representations of the same data. This can be done by
analyzing patterns and verifying insights from the data
ﬁelds. For example—dataset is inconsistent if number of
registered bank customers is less than number of active
bank customers.
–Validity: Check whether data conforms to the standard data
deﬁnitions, such as data types, size and format. This can be
done by analyzing the data types of ﬁelds in the source data
and available data.
Exploratory Data Analysis
After completing the quality checks on the data, the next step is
to perform exploratory data analysis (EDA), or descriptive
analysis. EDA is an approach to analyze the data by
summarizing its main characteristics into summary statistics
and graphical representations. For example, we might carry out
a univariate analysis (such as frequency or central tendency—
mean, median, and mode) on diﬀerent variables, and perform a
bivariate analysis, such as analyzing variables with each other
and analyzing variables with the target variable. In the context
of machine learning, the variable that is predicted is called the
output variable or business outcome or target variable. In the
loan delinquency problem, the target variable has two
outcomes: delinquent (customers who miss payment of loan
installment in the next three months) and non-delinquent
(customers do not miss payment of loan installment in the next
three months). This is illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Target creation
At this step, it is also important to realize that dataset should be
ﬁltered for appropriate customer cohort i.e. customers with
that speciﬁc personal loan. EDA can help generate insights by
analyzing diﬀerent variables for the customers of interest. In
this problem, variables such as the customer’s month-end
ledger balance, age, account tenure, and so on, can also be
useful to look into. EDA could help us analyze account balance
with respect to the target variable to tell whether there is any
account balance pattern that suggests whether a customer is
likely to miss payment. Overall, the objective of EDA is to try
and ﬁnd these speciﬁc patterns from the data. For example, Tab
