CHAPTER 12
Intelligent Automation of Fraud Detection
WE COVER AUDIT RELATED ERRORS AND FRAUD throughout this
book; however, this chapter is dedicated to intelligent financial fraud
detection and investigation (IFFDI) using artificial intelligence (AI). The
internal controls environment serves as the firewall to protect against fraud.
Prevention is different than detection and detection is different than
investigation. Detection implies active search to discover, find, uncover, or
expose fraud. Investigation begins once a reasonable degree of suspicion
develops about the likelihood that a fraud is taking place. In this chapter we
will cover both detection and investigation.
When deploying your fraud detection capabilities, you will address
questions such as
How to allocate capabilities between prevention, detection, and
investigation? What technologies to deploy for each?
When and for what to use deterministic versus stochastic technologies?
What methods, models, or techniques should you use?
How do you design and architect your IFFDI system?
How to protect your firm from AI‐centric fraud?
DETECTING FRAUD
Fraud happens when material misrepresentations of facts are made
intentionally and they lead to loss for one or more victims. The Association
of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE) classifies fraud against a firm into
two types: internal and external (ACFE, n.d.). Internal fraud, also known as
occupational fraud, is defined by ACFE as “the use of one's occupation for
personal enrichment through the deliberate misuse or misappropriation of
the employing organization's resources or assets.” Internal fraud is
committed by the managers, employees, owners, or board members of a

firm. External fraud, in contrast, is conducted by parties external to the
firm, for example, customers, suppliers, partners.
ACFE classifies internal fraud into three areas: corruption, asset
misappropriation, and financial statement fraud. ACFE has developed a
powerful and comprehensive representation of internal fraud. Known as the
Fraud Tree (Figure 12.1), it covers the various subcategories and subclasses
of internal fraud.
Fraud can happen at any point in an organization. For example, it can
happen at the employee level, at the board level, or across the value chain
via collaboration between partners and even competitors. Detecting fraud is
one of the most complex undertakings. Protecting a firm from any possible
fraud can be expensive and therefore costs of IFFDI need to be considered.
Let's not forget that in many cases savvy managers operate on the
borderline of law and while technically statements and disclosures may not
qualify as misrepresentations from a legal perspective, the underlying
motivation for business decisions could be self‐serving. For instance, the
management team of a nonprofit deploys a CEO friendly board and with the
board approval starts making investments in a manner that the CEO intends
to personally benefit from in the future. Such situations make fraud
detection extremely hard.
ELEMENTS OF FRAUD
In the 1950s, Donald Cressey presented the fraud triangle theory that
identified the three fraud elements as pressure, opportunity, and
rationalization (Cressey, 1953). A fourth element of capability was later
added and the model transformed from a triangle to a diamond (Wolfe and
Hermanson, 2004; Mansor, 2015). As we think about intelligent
automation, our design elements must first begin by analyzing the elements
of fraud and building capabilities around them.

FIGURE 12.1 The Fraud Tree
Pressure or Motivation
Preemptive detection of motivation can go a long way to detect and prevent
fraud. Motivation can be anything from personal to business situations. At
an individual level it could be when a person is facing financial difficulties
and hence decides to engage in a fraud. On a management team level, it
could be pressure to report certain earnings numbers for which guidance has
been provided. Motivation determination technologies are deployed to
evaluate the situations that can motivate a person or management team to
commit a fraud. They typically involve understanding the situational
dynamics to predict the likelihood of fraud.
Opportunity
The opportunity for fraud is based upon the internal controls weaknesses.
An environment that lacks controls or that has a culture that promotes
recklessness can be a fertile ground for fraud. The opportunities are
identified and exploited by individuals and management teams. Fraud
opportunity assessment technology is deployed to assess the control

weaknesses as well as cultural and behavioral modeling to assess the
seriousness and desire of the management team and boards to deploy
internal controls.
Rationalization
Rationalization is the justification that a person or team gives to the conduct
of fraud. This is a self‐deceiving factor where teams and individuals say to
themselves that it is okay to engage in a fraudulent behavior for such‐and‐
such reasons. The justification could be that it is a one‐time thing or that
they are only borrowing money or that they were denied proper
compensation and therefore it is their right to steal. Rationalization
detection technology is composed of systems deployed to perform
behavioral analysis of individuals and teams.
Capability
Capability is when a person or team believes that they have the capability to
get away with doing the fraud, to not get caught, and to pull it off.
Capability detection technology is also used to assess the materiality of the
impact a person, machine, or team can have.
AI has been used to combat fraud by building capabilities in accordance
with the fraud triangle in practice. For instance, Lin et al. (2015) employed
Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, Classification and Regression Trees
(CART), and Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) to study the three aspects
of the fraud triangle.
DOMAIN‐SPECIFIC FRAUD DETECTION
The FBI classifies financial frauds into various areas such as securities
fraud, credit card fraud, financial statement fraud, insurance fraud, and
corporate other fraud. One way to approach your design is to consider each
specific domain area in which you have material exposure. This means that
specialized solutions need to be developed in those specific domains.
Significant research exists in the use of intelligent automation for domain‐
specific fraud detection (Ngai et al., 2011; West and Bhattacharya, 2016).

STOPSCAM
The American Institute of Artificial Intelligence has developed a model
known as STOPSCAM. This model expands upon the domain‐specific
model and fraud elements to develop broad classification of fraud by
capability areas or detectors that focus on building and deploying intelligent
capabilities. STOPSCAM is an acronym for Strategy, Transactions,
Operations, Processes, Statements, Culture, Attitudes, and Model.
Strategy
The strategy tool analyzes a company's strategy to obtain key insights to
capture signals of significant changes or persistence in a company's
strategy. A sudden or abrupt change in strategy, a reluctance to change
strategy when it is evident that the strategy is not working, rise of a new
competitor, a change in technology, bankruptcy risk, and other strategy
concepts are captured and analyzed. Strategy changes also include mergers
and acquisitions and major financing events. Automated strategy analysis is
performed from analyzing analyst reports, company press releases, and
other news and opinions about a firm.
Transactions
Transaction‐level analysis is achieved by deploying systems that scan
transaction‐level details. For example, journal entries, G/L, supporting
documents inspection, and other similar applications of technology in
automated audit forms the baseline for transaction‐level continuous audit
with the explicit focus on fraud‐centric anomaly detection. The primary
goal in transaction analysis is anomaly detection.
Operations
Operational‐level fraud assessment is done by assessing the operational
footprint of a firm and including the value chain of a firm in both directions.
This means including the suppliers and partners (e.g., channel partners) and
customers to analyze the potential of fraud. In many cases the interaction or
structures among partners, subsidiaries, customers, and suppliers shows the
presence of fraud.

Processes
Process‐centric evaluation of fraud focuses on understanding anomalous
process patterns. These patterns could be based upon transaction patterns, or
people accessing systems abnormally, or awkward timings of accessing
systems. Process mining technologies, along with machine learning, are
used to evaluate this.
Statements
Statement analysis is performed by external parties where publicly available
financial statements are analyzed to determine the presence of fraud. This
can be based upon analyzing the text or other unstructured data from annual
reports, or financial ratio analyses, or by analyzing other company
communications, such as earnings call.
Culture
Organizational‐level automated analysis focuses on understanding the
culture, management, reporting relationships, social networks, board, and
other such factors. Many such factors provide information about potential
fraud. For instance, a forceful or overly aggressive CEO with a submissive
board can create an environment ripe for fraud.
Attitude
The attitude is the behavioral analysis of the management team and board
members. This is a critical part of analysis. Using pictures, videos, text, and
other combinations and available data, intelligent automation is used to
create a profile of individuals and of social networks. Social networks can
exist inside or outside the firm. They can exist between management team
members or board members and certain executives. They are formed by
shared interests and in terms of structural dynamics, the influence patterns
could be completely different than that shown on corporate organizational
charts. Understanding those patterns can shed light on how fraud can take
shape and who could be involved in that.

Model
A firm's business model is at the heart of its strategies and processes.
Changes in the business model can signify several things – including
opening up of opportunities for fraud. Technologies used to analyze
business models include business process mapping using machine learning
(Evermann et al., 2017). The rise of AI in business will also enable
businesses to launch new business models (Ehret and Wirtz, 2017).
TECHNOLOGIES AND MODELS
Ngai et al. (2011) performed literature research and showed that a wide
variety of approaches are being used in fraud detection. They developed a
model where they first outlined the broad categories of frauds such as
insurance fraud, securities and commodities fraud, bank fraud, and other
financial fraud. Then they further categorized based upon fraudulent
activities such as money laundering. And from a solution side they divided
the data mining solutions into classification, clustering, outlier detection,
prediction, regression, and visualization.
More recently, another group of researchers also performed an extensive
survey of fraud detection (West and Bhattacharya, 2016). They, too, first
categorized by fraud classes (e.g., insurance, financial statements, etc.).
However, they investigated several methods, including neural network,
logistic, support‐vector machine, decision trees, genetic algorithms,
Bayesian belief network, process mining, artificial immune system, and
hybrid methods. Their extensive survey revealed that a diversity of methods
are used in intelligent automation.
A third survey of literature used a similar approach to others; however,
these researchers divided the machine learning techniques into broad
groupings of supervised, unsupervised, and semi‐supervised. They also
provide examples of challenges in implementing some of the solutions and
techniques of addressing those problems (Abdallah et al., 2016).
The above research is very helpful to learn about various AI approaches
being used in different types of business areas. As we have discussed
throughout this book, a point solution approach is not enough if you want to
build a modern‐era audit or forensic accounting firm. Tools must work

together to form an ecosystem within which various agents can work
together to get work accomplished.
OUR APPROACH
We have approached fraud detection not only from the angle of problem
area (i.e., fraud category > fraud activity > solution) but also by introducing
a class layer for solution deployment in practical business areas (i.e.,
STOPSCAM agents). The STOPSCAM agents can be deployed in various
areas for comprehensive fraud detection. Building a comprehensive fraud
detection system requires blending the four key technologies of process
mining, robotic process automation, expert systems, and machine learning.
Within machine learning various types of models exist and some are better
than others for certain types of models.
Strategy, organization, culture, attitude, and business model are automated
by algorithms modeling social, behavioral, game theory – centric processes.
Transaction and financial statement fraud detection is automated by using
anomaly detection, behavioral, and process mining.
Supervised Models in Fraud Detection
Supervised learning techniques are deployed in anomaly detection, social,
and behavioral models. Both regression and classification can help in fraud
detection. Since supervised techniques are based upon known examples,
they are easier to interpret. The main issue with using supervised learning is
that we usually (and thankfully) have many more examples of fraud‐free
transactions than fraudulent transactions. Therefore, teaching the algorithm
becomes harder when, say, for every thousand examples of clean
transactions, one example of a fraudulent transaction is provided. There are
techniques that can be applied to balance out the examples. For example,
one way is to introduce synthetic (made‐up) examples of anomalous
behavior. The second limitation is that data requires labeling and unless data
is being pulled out of systems where both input and target output values are
present for the specific problem being addressed, we may have to rely upon
human‐centric labeling of the data. Recall that labeling means providing the
target output value for each input vector. That can become quite a laborious
project.