The audit senior provided you with an Excel file that includes gross patient revenue by hospital loca-
tion from 2013 to 2019. The senior asked you to perform exploratory data analytics and outline an audit 
plan, which you recognize is similar to outlining objectives, questions, and ­sub-questions for data analy-
sis. Before you can fully explore the data, you must understand it, so you begin with descriptive statistics.
Complete the chart.
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Descriptive Analysis:
Understand gross 
patient revenue 
(GrossPatientRevenue)  
for the year 2019, which  
is the year under audit.
What happened to 
gross patient revenue 
during 2019?
1. 
2.
Diagnostic Analysis:
Understand what happened 
to gross patient revenue for 
the year 2019 compared 
to 2018, Specifically, 
GrossPatientRevenue, 
GrossInpatientRevenue, and 
GrossOutpatientRevenue 
data points.
Which locations had 
changes in revenue 
from 2018 to 2019?
3.
4.
Predictive Analysis:
Develop an expectation 
for gross patient revenue 
in 2019 based on the 
components patient days, 
out patient visits, and 
average length of stay.
What factors drive 
changes in gross 
revenue?
5.
6.
	 7.	 Perform the possible analytics as described for each measure. 
Professional Application Case: Healthcare Service Company  3-59

3-60  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
PAC 3.2  Managerial Accounting: Evaluate Labor Costs and Productivity
Data   Managerial Accounting   Assume you are a managerial accountant for the consolidated Cal-
ifornia group of Kindred Hospitals. The director of operations has asked that you analyze the annual 
data associated with hospital labor. Specifically, the director of operations is interested in the following 
variables. 
Variables
Definition per Data Dictionary
HopsitalFTE
Number of hospital full time employees
NurseFTE
Average number of nursing personnel
ProductiveHours
Total productive hours
NonProductiveHours
Total nonproductive hours
PaidHours
Total paid hours
MedicalStaff 
Number of active medical staff
	
	 Complete the chart. 
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Descriptive Analysis:
Understand labor 
information for  
2018 - 2019.
What happened to 
labor hours during 
2018 and 2019?
1.
2.
Diagnostic Analysis:
Determine why 
variables changed 
between 2018 and 
2019. 
Which hospitals have 
increasing salary 
expenses from  
2018 to 2019?
3.
4.
Predictive Analysis:
Identify if there is 
relationship between 
total productive hours 
and gross patient 
revenue.
Can productive hours 
predict gross patient 
revenue?
5.
6.
	 7.	 Use the data to calculate the measures. 

PAC 3.3  Financial Accounting: Understand Patient Revenue
Data   Financial Accounting   You are a financial analyst working for the controller’s group for the 
California location of Kindred Hospital group. Your controller has highlighted the fact that gross revenue 
consists of both inpatient revenue and outpatient revenue. However, only one facility – Kindred Hospital- 
Rancho – has outpatient revenue. Therefore, the controller wants a full understanding of inpatient reve-
nue by facility for 2019. Specifically, you are asked to understand the dollar amount of inpatient revenue 
contributed by each facility in 2019, and how inpatient revenue has changed since 2018. Finally, the 
controller is creating a financial forecast for inpatient revenue for 2020 and wants to understand 
the utilization data that may contribute to the generation of this forecast. To satisfy your company 
cotroller, you are planning your analysis and have started the chart which follows. The controller has 
also provided you with a data dictionary for the data relevant to this analysis. 
Variables
Definition per Data Dictionary
DayTotal
Patient Days Total
OccupancyLicensed
Occupancy rate – Licensed beds
OccupancyAvailable
Occupancy rate – Available beds
AverageLengthStayAll
Average Length of Stay – Including Long Term Care
AverageLengthStayNoLTC
Average Length of Stay – Excluding Long Term Care
GrossInpatientRevenue
Gross Inpatient Revenue
Complete the chart for descriptive, diagnostic, and predictive analytics.
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Descriptive Analysis:
Understand gross 
inpatient revenue for 
the year 2019, which 
is the year under 
audit.
What happened to 
gross patient revenue 
during 2019?
1.
2.
Diagnostic Analysis:
Understand what 
happened to gross 
inpatient revenue 
for the year 2019 
compared to 2018.
How has revenue 
changed at the 
locations?
3.
4.
Predictive Analysis:
Identify the utilization 
measures that are 
related to in-patient 
revenue.
Are there any 
measures correlated 
to inpatient revenue?
5.
6.
	 7.	 Use the data available to calculate the measures.
Professional Application Case: Healthcare Service Company  3-61

3-62  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
PAC 3.4  Tax Accounting: Evaluate Non-Profit and For-Profit Tax Return Data
Data   Tax Accounting   As a tax accountant at Kindred you have been asked to analyze the non-profit 
and for-profit hospital data. Kindred Hospitals has three hospitals in California that are tax exempt orga-
nizations. These three hospitals must be separated from the for-profit hospitals for tax purposes. In addi-
tion, you have been asked to do an analysis of a sample of non-profit tax filings and compare those filings 
to the amounts that Kindred’s non-profit hospitals filed for 2019. The variables and data definitions for 
both files are included in the following tables:
IRS 990 Data:
Variables
Definition per Data Dictionary
Assets
Total asset book value at year end
Income
Net Income
Revenue
Revenue reported on line 12 of Form 990
Kindred 2013 – 2019 Financial Data
Variables
Definition per Data Dictionary
TotalAssets
Total Assets 
TotalRevenue
Net patient revenue plus other operating revenue
NetIncome
Net Income
	
 	 Complete the chart.
Objective
Initial Question
Sub-questions
Possible Measures
Descriptive Analysis:
Understand assets, revenue, 
and income information for 
Kindred’s non-profit and for-
profit hospitals
Which hospitals 
have the highest 
income?
1.
2.
Descriptive Analysis:
Understand how IRS 990 
data for non-profit hospitals 
compares to the Kindred non-
profit hospitals 
Are the Kindred 
Hospitals 
comparable to the 
sample of IRS 990 
filings. 
3.
4.
Diagnostic Analysis:
Identify trends in assets, 
revenue, and income for 
Kindred hospitals. 
5.
6.
7.
Diagnostic Analysis:
Compare Kindred data to IRS 
990 data.
8.
9.
10.
	11.	 Use the data to calculate the measures. 

Le Grind Continuing Case: Motivation and Specific Questions for 
Analyzing Gross Profit
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more details about the continuing case. 
Le Grind Continuing Case: Motivation and Specific Questions for Analyzing Gross Profit
3-63

4-0
 C H A PT E R  4 
 Planning Data and 
Analysis Strategies 
 Chapter Preview 
 Armed with an understanding of the motivations and objectives for the data analysis project 
and after formulating the necessary objective questions, it is time for the final step in the plan-
ning stage–designing the data and analysis strategies. You will soon be expected to apply your 
knowledge, common sense, and problem-solving skills to design a variety of accounting, audit, 
and tax related data and analyses strategies. This chapter will help you develop the skills neces-
sary to create effective data analysis project plans.
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1. Prepare data
2. Build information
     models
    
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1
 Professional Insight: Why Should You Plan Data and Analysis 
Strategies? 
 Taylor was excited to begin her career in auditing after interning at a Big Four accounting firm 
during the last busy season. 
 My audit team had me design my own data and analysis strategies and document each 
step I performed. While I lacked confidence at first, I felt very supported. I learned so 
much, even when I made mistakes and had to pivot my strategies. 
I was more successful when I understood the motivation for and the objective 
of my tasks. I was able to formulate better questions, which resulted in better 

Chapter Roadmap  4-1
data choices. The measurement scales of my selected data also pointed me 
toward the appropriate analyses.
My first task was a descriptive analysis. I had to determine if the year-end accounts 
receivable subsidiary ledger and general ledger balances reconciled. After checking 
if any credit customer’s activities were excluded from the general ledger accounts 
receivable balance, I created an accounts receivable aging report listing each credit 
customer’s outstanding balances from the subsidiary ledger. I compared the aging 
reports’ items to the general ledger accounts receivable postings and noted each 
unmatched item. If there were no unmatched items, the accounts receivable balance 
in the general ledger was successfully reconciled and verified.
I then designed a diagnostic analysis strategy to determine which receivable activities 
were causing any unmatched items I had found. My strategy began with gathering the 
client’s accounts receivable process documentation. For each unmatched item, I iden-
tified which process caused the items to be included in both ledgers. Documenting my 
work helped me explain what, how, and why I performed each step. This record will be 
helpful when we repeat this verification in next year’s audit. Designing my own data 
and analysis strategies helped me gain relevant skills and the confidence to start 
my auditing career.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 4.1   Identify the components of 
a data analysis project plan.
•	 Create a Data Analysis Project 
Plan
•	 Sample Data Analysis Project 
Plan
Build a Project Plan for Inventory 
Costs
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.2   Describe how to develop a 
data strategy.
•	 Identify Appropriate Data
•	 Evaluate Data Fields and Sources
•	 Consider Data Strategy Risks and 
Implement Controls
Identify Data Characteristics 
(Example: Accounting Information 
Systems)
 LO 4.3   Explain how an analysis 
strategy is designed.
•	 Designing Analyses to Describe 
and Diagnose
•	 Designing Analyses to Predict and 
Prescribe
Create a Predictive Data Analysis 
Project Plan
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.4   Summarize data and 
analyses strategies in professional 
practice areas.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing 
•	 Financial Accounting 
•	 Managerial Accounting 
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Strategies with 
Professional Practice Areas
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are 
­available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform. 

4-2  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data 
Analysis Projects?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Identify the components of a data analysis project plan.
Recall that the first step in planning a data analysis project is understanding the motivations 
for the project, such as identifying problems, evaluating patterns and opportunities, measuring 
performance, and regulatory compliance. Considering the perspectives of the project’s primary 
stakeholders is an important part of that understanding. Next, thinking critically about a proj-
ect’s purpose helps define the objective and articulate the project’s specific questions. ­Common 
objectives and questions can be grouped by whether the analysis results describe, diagnose, or 
predict an outcome, or if the analysis results should prescribe future organizational strategy.
The final step of the data analysis planning stage is designing a professional plan for the 
data analysis project. Critical thinking continues to play a vital role, from selecting a strategy 
for the data and the analysis, to identifying inherent risks to both and embedding internal con-
trols to reduce them. A data and analysis strategy plan is an organized and deliberate blueprint 
for the project. It also allows someone other than its creator to perform the analysis, which 
can free accountants to perform other valuable services with their business and regulatory 
expertise.
Create a Data Analysis Project Plan
Many of us use planning tools every day, such as relying on navigation applications to plan 
travel time and how to get to new destinations. Planning tools make tasks more efficient and 
the results more effective. They also often provide logical explanations for the necessity of 
certain steps or why they should be performed in a particular order.
This chapter summarizes a tool for data analysis project planning that provides similar 
benefits for accountants (Illustration 4.1). The order of the components is intentional: 
Step 1 
Focus on the objective: 
•	Keep the project’s objective and specific questions in mind to select the best data and 
analysis strategies to fulfill the objective and answer those questions. Simply remember-
ing to ask how the plan’s proposed data and analysis strategy decisions relate to the objec-
tive helps us make better choices. 
Step 2 
Select a data strategy: 
•	Use critical thinking to develop and rank a few data alternatives. This ensures that we 
choose the data option most appropriate for the objective.
Step 3 
Select an analysis strategy: 
•	Use what was learned from selecting the data strategy and apply that same development 
and ranking process to analyses alternatives. Following this step increases the likelihood 
of selecting the best analysis option.
Step 4 
Consider risks: 
•	Considering and prioritizing critical risks to both the data and the analysis strategies 
reveals how these risks can create misleading and invalid results.

4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-3
ILLUSTRATION 4.1  A Data Analysis Project Plan
3
4
5
Stay focused on the project’s objective and specific questions.
Project Objective
1
Develop data alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Develop analysis alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Analysis Strategy
Identify risks to both the data strategy and analysis strategy.
Consider Risks
Implement controls to reduce risks within the data and analysis strategies.
Embed Controls
2 Data Strategy
Step 5 
Embed controls: 
