Managerial accountants prepare analysis strategies, both for routine and ad hoc (one-time) 
objectives for each functional area of their organization. These strategies use data across mea-
surement scales to describe, diagnose, predict, and prescribe strategy impacts:
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business organization, policy and process will 
increase efficiencies, for example, to reduce non-value-added steps and delays.
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business partnerships, operations, and internal 
controls will increase effectiveness.
•	Increasing competitive advantage through many new business intelligence opportunities.
•	Improving compliance with all legal and regulatory regulations.
Managerial accountants may perform data analysis to determine the potential business pro-
cess and internal control benefits of automating the purchase requisition to vendor invoice 
process (see Illustration 4.22). Automation could force all departments to go through the 
authorized business process rather than going around it. Identifying risks to the data and anal-
yses used in managerial accounting is important to ensure analysis results are accurate and 
reliable ­(Illustration 4.26). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.7: Use Multiple Disciplines 
in Managerial Accounting
The knowledge base needed by managerial accountants is broad, involving multiple disciplines. 
For example, to reduce factory operating costs, managerial accountants must understand the 
engineering of their production machines and know how to create reliable statistical models 
for future production (Knowledge):
•	 Accounting and economic concepts
•	 Organizational behavior
•	 Operations management
•	 Technology tools
•	 Quantitative analyses disciplines
ILLUSTRATION 4.26  Risks and Controls for Managerial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
• Dirty data.
• Missing data.
• Independent verification.
• Segregation of duties.
• Verify authorization.
• Considering the purpose when
  making data choices.
• Irrelevant data.
• Sound personnel governance.
• Errors in calculations.
• Verifying all steps and calculations.
• Errors in attributions.
• Biases and self-interests.
Risks
Control Choices
Tax Accounting
Thanks to data analytics, tax accountants have more information for their tax planning and 
compliance services, which improves their judgments and how they document defend their 

4-32  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
positions to both clients and regulators. Recent surveys show that over 58% of tax accountants 
are using data and analytics strategies for many areas of their professional practice1, including:
•	Sales and use taxes and local taxes (SALT).
•	Value added taxes (VAT).
•	Goods and services taxes (GST).
•	Customs duties.
•	Transfer pricing and intercompany transactions.
•	Tax compliance.
•	Tax provisions.
Perhaps the biggest effect of data analysis strategies on tax practice is the movement away from a 
dependency on historic data and toward a forward-looking, value-adding service perspective by 
using predicting and prescribing analytics strategies. Examples of these predictive and prescrip-
tive analytics include using complex data modeling to evaluate decision and position alterna-
tives, which improves the value and accuracy of advice. Illustration 4.27 is a live dashboard that 
shows current year medical expenses compared to the level needed for itemized deductions for 
five of their individual clients. This would help the tax accountant provide advice to these clients.
1International Tax Review (2019). Preparing for the future of tax. https://www.internationaltaxreview.com/
article/2a6a41udxe4e2kuc8zoqo/preparing-for-the-future-of-tax (accessed 13 July 2022). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.8: Think Critically in  
Tax Accounting
•	 Tax accountants consider their clients, tax authorities, and their tax firm partners when they 
plan different data analyses. Each of these stakeholders may have different objectives and 
priorities. For example, clients may prioritize minimizing their tax obligations, so that would 
be the objective of your tax planning services (Stakeholders).
•	 Strong research and analysis skills are necessary, such as when performing tax research, devel-
oping tax strategies, and estimating tax liabilities. For example, state laws are different than the 
national and international law for every type of tax category (Knowledge).
•	 Clients, both individuals and organizations, may have incentives to omit taxable revenues and 
include irrelevant and inappropriate expenses. These data risks should be controlled, perhaps 
with interview questions as well as verifying the records provided through indirect tests of 
reasonableness (Risks).
Another example is sophisticated querying of clients’ accounting data to better identify oppor-
tunities, such as when to buy or sell assets, and understanding the operational decisions driv-
ing tax liabilities.
$(25,000) $(20,000) $(15,000) $(10,000)
$(5,000)
$-
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
Client A
Client B
Client C
Client D
Client E
Medical Expenses Excess (Deficit)
for Itemized Deduction
ILLUSTRATION 4.27  Medical 
Expenses Itemized Deduction 
Threshold Assessment by Client

4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-33
Analysis
Data
Risks
Control Choices
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Missing data.
• Implement backups.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data retention and
  destruction policies.
• Data authenticity and dirty
   data verification and correction.
• Tax management controls.
• Errors in data evaluations and tests.
• Verification of all tax rules’
   liability steps and calculations.
• Sensitivity analysis for
   critical results.
• Errors in calculations and forms.
• Eﬀective visualizations
   and explanations.
• Lack of tax code knowledge.
ILLUSTRATION 4.28  Risks and Controls for Tax Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Apply It 4.4
Match Strategies 
with Professional 
Practice Areas
For each of the following data and analyses objectives:
1.	 Identify the data measurement scale that would be utilized.
2.	 Identify one practice area that is likely to perform that analysis.
Some of the options have more than one correct answer for both (1) and (2), but only enter one correct 
answer for each.
Data Measurement Scales: categorical, ordinal, interval, ratio
Practice Areas: Accounting information systems, Auditing, Financial accounting, Managerial 
accounting, Tax accounting
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end open 
invoices on days outstanding.
Predicting cost savings and productivity increases 
from new AIS investments.
Creating dollar value stratified sampling plans 
for investment asset accounts.
Evaluating web server security incidents by type 
of incident.
Prescribing product revenue increases by product 
from marketing campaigns.
Predicting future cash flows from operations.
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Identifying risks and assuring that proper controls are in place to mitigate risks are also critical 
(Illustration 4.28).

4-34  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
SOLUTION
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end 
open invoices on days outstanding.
Interval
Financial and 
managerial 
accounting
Predicting cost savings and productivity 
increases from new AIS investments.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Creating dollar value stratified sampling 
plans for investment asset accounts.
Interval
Auditing
Evaluating web server security incidents by 
type of incident.
Categorical
Accounting 
information 
systems
Prescribing product revenue increases by 
product from marketing campaigns.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Predicting future cash flows from 
operations.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Interval
Accounting 
Information 
systems
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Ratio
Tax accounting
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Ratio
Auditing
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Categorical
Financial 
accounting
Chapter Review and Practice
Learning Objectives Review
❶  Identify the components of a data analysis project 
plan.
A data analysis project plan is a blueprint to follow for the project. 
Using a planning tool can help choose the best data and analysis strat-
egies for the project objectives. There are five steps:
•  Step 1: Focus on the project’s objective and the specific questions 
that must be answered.
•  Step 2: Decide which data are needed to answer the questions, 
develop alternatives, evaluate, and rank the best option.

Key Terms Review  4-35
deviation), visualizations, correlation, and calculations (e.g. 
totals, percent change).
•  Typical analyses used for predictive and prescriptive analyses 
include trendlines, regression analysis, optimization models, 
and what-if analyses.
•  There are many common risks inherent in descriptive, diag-
nostic, predictive, and prescriptive analyses that can be iden-
tified and controlled. Some of these risks include performing 
an analysis with dirty data, or analysis not appropriate for 
the variable’s measure scales, using too small a sample, or a 
­non-representative sample, or including (or omitting) variables 
from the analysis.
❹  Summarize data and analyses strategies in profes-
sional practice areas.
Each professional accounting practice area plans different data and 
analyses strategies for varying objectives, using data with a range of 
measurement scales to describe, diagnose, predict, and prescribe results 
for their stakeholders and objectives. The risks inherent to their data 
and analysis choices, as well as the controls they implement are a func-
tion of their roles, responsibilities, and project objectives:
•  Accounting information systems professionals plan data and 
analysis strategies for AIS governance, strategic planning and 
evaluation, operational performance, and compliance objec-
tives. Their projects typically involve business process function-
ality, business intelligence, and cybersecurity purposes.
•  Auditors plan data and analyses that have professional audit 
process compliance and audit quality objectives to verify the 
representativeness of their clients’ financial statement balances 
or their organization’s accounting systems. External auditors 
have the additional data risks of using data that has been cap-
tured and extracted by their clients, oftentimes not able to verify 
the data completeness or accuracy.
•  Financial accountants focus on regulatory compliance regard-
ing transaction capturing, recording, processing, storing, and 
reporting objectives.
•  Managerial accountants have a wide variety of internal gover-
nance, strategic, financing, investing, and operational objectives 
for their data and analysis plans.
•  Tax accountants focus on both compliance and more for-
ward-facing tax planning opportunities to serve their clients and 
organizations with their data analysis strategy plans. Similar to 
external auditors, tax accountants often must use data sets pre-
pared by their clients, which may have greater risks of inaccu-
racy and incompleteness.
•  Step 3: Consider the methods available to do the analysis and 
rank the alternatives. Evaluate and choose the best strategy 
option.
•  Steps 4 and 5: Consider critical risks inherent to both the data 
strategy and analysis strategy.
•  Steps 4 and 5: Embed controls to reduce these risks in data strat-
egy and analysis strategy.
❷  Describe how to develop a data strategy.
A successful project hinges on using the appropriate data and evaluat-
ing its characteristics. Considering the data’s potential impact on the 
analysis and any risks makes it easier to select the most suitable data 
for a project’s goals:
•  The first step is selecting the most appropriate data. Appropriate 
data are data that are available and relevant to the data analysis 
objective questions.
•  The data’s measurement scales must also be suitable for use with 
the chosen data analysis method, as not all analyses are valid for 
every measure scale. Data can have categorical, interval, ordinal, 
or ratio scales.
•  Data can be either internal (generated within the organization), 
external (obtained from a source outside of the organization), or 
a combination of both. Data can be raw measures or assigned 
non-measures, and can also be calculated fields. 
•  Consider potential risks related to the data chosen for the anal-
ysis and put controls in place to mitigate those risks. Three 
common data risks (and controls) include: non-representative 
samples (verify representativeness of the sample), outlier data 
points (identify outliers and then justify or remove), and dirty 
data (verify integrity of the data set and clean).
❸  Explain how an analysis strategy is designed.
There are two things to consider when designing a data analysis strat-
egy: (1) the objective questions and (2) the measurement scale of the 
data. There are four data analysis objectives: descriptive, diagnostic, 
predictive, or prescriptive. The questions we design are based on the 
objective:
•  When designing any type of analysis, the appropriate analysis 
is dependent on the measurement scale of the data. ­Typical 
descriptive and diagnostic analysis methods include measure 
of central tendency (mean, median), frequency distributions, 
measures of data dispersion (e.g. range, quartiles, standard 
Key Terms Review
Attributes  4-12
Calculated data  4-14
Data set  4-12
Dirty data  4-16
Fields  4-12
Measured raw numeric data  4-13
Measurement scale  4-14
Non-measured raw data  4-13
Records  4-12
Variable  4-20

4-36
CHAPTER 4 Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
 ILLUSTRATION 4.29  Sort Outstanding Invoices by Date 
Stocks Geography
A
Z
Z
A
A
Z
Z
A
Queries & Connections
Queries & Connections
Edit Links
Properties
Refresh
All
Data Types
Sort & Filter
Filter
Get
Data
From
Text/CSV
From
Web
Get & Transform Data
From Table/
Range
Recent
Sources
Existing
Connections
Insert
File
Home
Formulas
Data
Review View
Help
Page Layout
Acrobat
Draw
AutoSave
On
Stocks Geography
A
Z
Z
A
Queries & Connections
Queries & Connections
Edit Links
Properties
Refresh
All
Data Types
Sort & Filter
Filter
Get
Data
From
Text/CSV
From
Web
Get & Transform Data
From Table/
Range
Recent
Sources
Existing
Connections
1
Sort
 STEP 2:  Create a new column to the right of the data for the year-end date of 12/31/2025: 
