AnalysisDate
Year
Values
CustID
AnalysisDate
CountInvoices
CountInvoices (...
CustID
Sheet 1
5
Your visualization is complete (Illustration 4.46)!
ILLUSTRATION 4.46  WeMakeIt, 
Inc. Accounts Receivable
1–3
0
4–6
CountInvoices (groups)
7–9
10
20
CustID
30
40
50
2024
2025
Year
Number of Outstanding Invoices by Unique Customers 2024 
and 2025
	
In the Visualizations pane, Count Invoices (groups) should be in the axis area. You 
may need to move the AnalysisDate field up to the Legend field by dragging it. The Count 
Invoices field should be in the Values area (Illustration 4.45).

Multiple Choice Questions  4-45
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Which of these is not an objective of data analysis strategies?
a.	 Collecting data.
b.	 Describing data.
c.	 Diagnosing data.
d.	 Predicting a future value of data.
e.	 Prescribing the impact of a particular strategy on the future 
value of the data.
2.  (LO 1)  Diagnosing objectives in data analysis strategies involve 
which of the following?
a.	 Looking for complete independence of variables.
b.	 Looking for causality in regression variables.
c.	 Looking for where to place the blame for bad operational 
results.
d.	 Looking for associations between data variables.
e.	 Predicting what future outcomes will be in the data.
3.  (LO 1)  The components of an effective data analysis strategy plan 
consider each of the following except for
a.	 analysis controls.
b.	 analysis risks.
c.	 analysis objectives.
d.	 analysis complexity.
4.  (LO 1)  Which of the following specific questions depicts a descrip-
tive analysis objective for accounts receivable balance at year-end?
a.	 How many invoices from the current year were collected 
during the year?
b.	 What was the total of all sales revenues, cash and credit sales, 
for the year?
c.	 How many salespersons were employed in New York City this 
year?
d.	 What is the average days in inventory for each of your product 
lines?
e.	 How many of the open invoices at the end of the year are past 
due?
5.  (LO 1)  You are asked to perform an analysis predicting the accounts 
payable balance at the year-end. Which of the following data sources 
are best to analyze for this objective?
a.	 A list of authorized new vendors for the year.
b.	 Open vendor invoices that refer to purchases already received.
c.	 A list of checks paid to accounts payable vendors during the 
year.
d.	 A list of purchase orders issued during the month of December.
e.	 None of these data resources are useful to predict the accounts 
payable year-end balance.
6.  (LO 1)  Assume you are asked to estimate the amount of uncollectible 
receivables at year-end. Which of the following is not an analysis risk to 
consider when estimating accounts receivable bad debts at year-end?
a.	 The number of full-time sales employees is reported 
inaccurately.
b.	 The calculation of days outstanding is inaccurate.
c.	 The company changed collection policies for certain 
customers.
d.	 There are new customers who are not included in the analysis 
of aged receivables.
e.	 There are mathematical errors in the summation of 
receivables.
7.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is an appropriate response to the 
data risk that the sample selected for analysis is inappropriate?
a.	 Add missing variables to see explanatory power changes.
b.	 Test a sample distribution form for statistical test assumptions.
c.	 Verify the representativeness of your sample.
d.	 Explain the rule used for outlier removal.
e.	 Know your outlier data point.
8.  (LO 1)  Critically thinking through the risks to a data analysis strat-
egy during planning will help avoid
a.	 data selection biases.
b.	 judgment errors from lack of experience.
c.	 interpretation errors from dirty data sets.
d.	 incorrect applications of statistical tests.
e.	 All of the these are possible costs from not considering the 
risks to data analyses choices.
9.  (LO 1)  A data analyses strategy is more likely to be successful if 
you critically think through
a.	 the analysis performed by your competitors.
b.	 the results you want to achieve.
c.	 the data that will best inform your questions.
d.	 your objectives for the analysis.
e.	 None of these help you perform better data analyses strategy 
planning.
10.  (LO 2)  Which of the following refers to the content of a data set’s 
row?
a.	 Data field.
b.	 Attribute.
c.	 Single occurrence of the data record.
d.	 All these define a row of data in a dataset.
11.  (LO 2)  Which of the following could refer to the name of a col-
umn in a sales invoices data set?
a.	 Invoice 3570.
b.	 Customers in Orlando, Florida.
c.	 CustomerState.
d.	 BankStatementDate.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 

4-46  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
12.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is an example of knowledge you 
might need to acquire for data analysis strategy planning?
a.	 The analysis is appropriate for your data measurement scales.
b.	 An understanding of your biases.
c.	 Identifying the key stakeholders.
d.	 Analysis resources that are available for your compensation.
e.	 Compensation correlation with results.
13.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is not a data measure scale that 
can be used in designing your data analysis strategy?
a.	 Optimal data
b.	 Ordinal data
c.	 Interval data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 All of these are data measure scales.
14.  (LO 2)  Which of the following data measure scales allows for 
meaningful multiplication of data points?
a.	 Interval data
b.	 Categorical data
c.	 Ordinal data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 Group data
15.  (LO 3)  Descriptive analyses that include median central ten-
dency measures are appropriate for which data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical 
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All these measurement scales support the median central ten-
dency measure.
16.  (LO 3)  Diagnostic analyses that include data dispersion measures 
such as variance and standard deviation are appropriate for which 
data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for variance analysis.
17.  (LO 3)  Bar chart visualizations are appropriate for data with 
which measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for bar charts.
18.  (LO 3)  Which of the following objective questions reflects a diag-
nostic purpose for accounts receivable year-end balance?
a.	 How many outstanding invoices are there in the year-end 
accounts receivable balance?
b.	 What is the value of the year-end accounts receivable balance?
c.	 Are new customers causing the increase in outstanding 
invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance com-
pared to last year?
d.	 What is the median value for outstanding invoices in the year-
end accounts receivable balance?
e.	 What is the invoice that has been outstanding the longest 
period of time in the year-end accounts receivable balance?
19.  (LO 3)  Predictive and prescriptive analyses that include creating 
trendline visualizations are appropriate for which data measurement 
scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All of these measurement scales support using trendline 
visualizations. 
20.  (LO 2, LO 3)  Which of these analysis strategies involve categori-
cal and ratio data measurement scales?
a.	 Reconciliations of subsidiary ledger balances to the general 
ledger balance.
b.	 Depreciation schedules for all real estate assets.
c.	 Which types of capital sourcing have the highest cost of 
capital.
d.	 Changes to the tax rates applicable to their organization.
21.  (LO 4)  Managerial accountants would most likely plan data anal-
yses when which of the following occur?
a.	 Changes to the tax rates.
b.	 Elimination of the financial statement footnote disclosure 
requirements.
c.	 Changes to Securities and Exchange Commission website.
d.	 Changes to their organization’s performance.
22.  (LO 4)  AIS accountants would most likely design a data analysis 
strategy for which of the following opportunities? 
a.	 New technologies that can provide cost savings for opera-
tional processes.
b.	 New customers in the marketplace.
c.	 Turnover in the regulatory body leadership.
d.	 Changes to the footnote disclosures required by generally 
accepted accounting rules.
e.	 Changes in tax rules.
23.  (LO 4)  Auditors plan data analyses strategies for which of the fol-
lowing situations?
a.	 Evaluating the effectiveness of internal controls in their cli-
ent’s accounting system.
b.	 Evaluating the representativeness of an account balance on 
their client’s balance sheet or income statement.
c.	 Considering the risk involved in providing an audit opinion 
for a client.
d.	 Investigating whether a client’s assumptions for recording 
their lease liabilities is consistent with other companies in 
their industry.
e.	 All of these are examples of situations where auditors plan 
their data analysis strategies.
24.  (LO 4)  Financial accountants would most likely plan data analy-
ses strategies for which of the following?
a.	 Changes to the management team.
b.	 New competitors in the marketplace.

Brief Exercises  4-47
c.	 Changes to their assumptions and estimates for end of period 
adjusting entries.
d.	 Changes to the tax rates applicable to their organization.
e.	 None of these would motivate data analyses by financial 
accountants.
25.  (LO 4)  Tax accountants would most likely plan a data analysis 
strategy that can
a.	 describe cash outflows for business expenses during the last 
year.
b.	 evaluate changes to the financial statement footnote disclo-
sure rules.
c.	 compare advertising expenses to sales revenue increases.
d.	 compare organizational strategy options to predicted opera-
tional performance.
e.	 None of these would motivate data analyses by tax 
accountants.
BE 4.1  (LO 1)  Put the data analysis project plan components in their proper sequential order, starting 
with number 1 for the first step.
	___ a.  Embed controls.
	___ b.  Identify project objective and specific questions.
	___ c.  Design data strategy.
	___ d.  Consider risks.
	___ e.  Design analysis strategy.
BE 4.2  (LO 1)  Put the steps of creating a data strategy in proper order, starting with number 1 for the 
first step.
	___ a.	  Choose and value the factors upon which to rank the data alternatives.
	___ b.	  Evaluate data alternative rankings and select the best data strategy option.
	___ c.	  Based on the objective, develop a few data alternatives.
	___ d.  Extract, clean, and transform the data fields to prepare the data for analysis.
Brief Exercises
Review Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Describe the five components in a data analysis project 
plan.
2.  (LO 1)  Discuss why it is important for accounting professionals 
to focus on the objective and questions to generate data and analysis 
alternatives.
3.  (LO 1)  Describe data and analysis risks that should be considered 
when planning a data analysis project.
4.  (LO 2)  Define and describe the four measurement scales used as 
accounting data variables.
5.  (LO 2)  Explain how selecting certain data fields could be inappro-
priate for your project plan.
6.  (LO 2)  Provide examples of two common data risks and a control 
for each that would reduce the risk.
7.  (LO 3)  Discuss why it is important to know the measurement 
scales of variables used in the analysis when determining whether to 
design a descriptive, diagnostic, predictive or prescriptive data analy-
sis strategy.
8.  (LO 3)  Discuss why it is important to match the type of analysis 
performed with the measurement scale of the data.
9.  (LO 3)  Explain a trend analyses strategy, and provide an example 
of how an accountant may analyze sales using a trend analysis.
10.  (LO 4)  Assume you are a systems accountant working in the 
accounting information systems group at your company. You have 
been asked to perform data analysis to analyze the number of spam 
emails that pass through to employees before and after the company’s 
investment in a new firewall. Discuss data risks and identify related 
controls to minimize those risks in your analysis.
11.  (LO 4)  Assume you are an auditor working to test internal controls 
regarding p-card usage at a company. You have the following data fields:
EmployeeNumber
EmployeeName
P-cardTransactionDate
P-cardTransaction vendor
P-cardTransactionAmount
Describe a descriptive analysis strategy you can perform using the 
data strategy of the p-card transaction amount and any one of the 
other data fields.
12.  (LO 4)  Assume you are a tax accountant evaluating an individu-
al’s financial records for their federal tax compliance. What data risks 
should be considered?

4-48  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
PONo
VendID
VendorName
Vendor 
Quality
Vendor 
Payterms
PODate
PO 
ItemNo
ItemCost
ItemQty
2001
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/1/2023
23568
41.99
12
2002
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/2/2023
23567
31.99
12
2003
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
32425
15.99
11
2004
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
12/4/2023
32426
15.99
10
2005
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
12/5/2023
32427
15.99
25
2006
258
Snappy Supplies
5
net 45
12/6/2023
11246
3.25
26
2007
153
2
2/10 net 60
12/7/2023
11258
333.25
35
153
Production
2
2/10 net 60
12/8/2023
11259
6.75
45
2009
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/9/2023
23566
22.99
100
BE 4.3  (LO 1)  Financial Accounting   For each of the following, list which critical thinking element 
is most clearly involved (S = Stakeholders; P = Purpose; A = Alternatives; R = Risks; K = Knowledge):
	___ 1.  Knowing what valuation procedure to use for U.S. GAAP.
	___ 2.  Considering the impact of the analysis results.
	___ 3.  The basis for the appropriateness of your data selections.
	___ 4.  Not just going with the first idea that you think of for your data and your analysis.
	___ 5.  Performing an analysis that is not appropriate for the measurement scale of your data.
BE 4.4  (LO 2)  Match the data measurement scale that could be utilized to each example.
Measurement scales can be used once, more than once, or not at all. 
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Interval
d.	 Ratio
Example
Measurement Scale
	 1.	Customer survey ratings. 
	 2.	Account numbers in the chart of accounts. 
	 3.	States or regions of the country. 
	 4.	Book value of depreciable assets. 
	 5.	Transaction dates, such as the dates orders are shipped. 
	 6.	Credits scores of loan applicants.
	 7.	The VendorID field. 
	 8.	Sales revenues. 
	 9.	The set weight of product boxes shipped. 
	10.	Supermarket inventory product type, such as produce, pet food, 
meat, and frozen foods. 
BE 4.5  (LO 2)  Auditing   Assume you are an audit senior responsible for supervising this year’s intern 
on a data analysis project related to the client’s purchases. You provided the intern with a data set and 
