--- PAGE 22 ---
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-21
SOLUTION
Task
Skill
Gather relevant data.
Critical thinking and data literacy
Compare to prior year filings.
Critical thinking and technological agility
Prepare an analysis of changes from prior 
year.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Compare to similar organizations.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year data to tax preparation 
software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year and prior year data to 
data analysis software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Prepare a presentation on current tax liability 
for LocalPics senior management.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility, and communication
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset 
Applied?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➍
Explain how to apply a data analytics mindset to the data analysis process.
You have learned that a data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically thinking 
through the planning, analysis, and interpretation of data results before making and commu-
nicating a professional choice or decision. The data analysis process requires applying critical 
thinking skills at each stage:
•	Stage 1: Taking the time to critically create and evaluate a data analysis plan will ensure 
you have considered all possible aspects of the analysis.
•	Stage 2: Preparing data, building information models, and exploring data also require 
thinking critically as you move through the analyze stage of the project. 
•	Stage 3: Finally, critical thinking will help you interpret and communicate findings in 
the results stage.
There are six elements of critical thinking to consider when performing data analytics: 
stakeholders, purpose, alternatives, risks, knowledge, and self-reflection (Illustration 1.18). 
Keep in mind that these elements are not sequential, rather they are recursive. In other words, 
the order in which you consider the elements is not as important as continually thinking 
through them.

--- PAGE 23 ---
1-22  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Understand the Stakeholders
Stakeholders are those individuals or groups with an interest in the outcome of a data anal-
ysis project. Stakeholders can be internal or external to an organization (Illustration 1.19).
ILLUSTRATION 1.19  Internal and External Stakeholders
Investors
Creditors
Regulators
Community
Clients or
Customers
Suppliers
Outsource
Partners
Industry
Analysts
Managers
Employees
Owners
Internal 
to your 
business
•	Internal stakeholders are individuals or groups involved in a businesses’ operations. 
They include an organization’s managers and employees.
•	External stakeholders are individuals or groups outside the company. Examples 
include investors and creditors, regulators, organizational partners (clients or customers, 
suppliers, outsource partners, and donors), and community leaders and members.
Purpose
Risks
Self-
Reflection
Knowledge
Stakeholders
Alternatives
Your data analyses
will have 
SPARKS
when critical thinking
is integrated!
ILLUSTRATION 1.18  SPARKS: The Six Elements of Critical Thinking

--- PAGE 24 ---
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-23
Let’s go back to the One Stop Shop (OSS) analysis. Who are the relevant stakeholders in 
the analysis of OSS performance? Internal stakeholders would include the person perform-
ing the analysis, the supervisor, and the employees affected by the outcome of the analysis. 
If the analysis showed that the decrease in sales and profit was primarily driven by one 
region, internal stakeholders such as the employees in the region would have an interest in 
the analysis.
As for external stakeholders, investors want to be sure they are getting a positive return 
on their investment and creditors want to know that OSS can pay their debts. If profits are 
declining, both parties will be interested in the results of the analysis. If sales and profits 
are down due to a poor product, external stakeholders such as customers will likely stop pur-
chasing that product, and suppliers would eventually be affected as demand slows. Overall, 
understanding the stakeholders helps us to better understand the impact of the analysis and 
can guide our choice of data and analysis methods.
Identify the Purpose
Knowing the reason for data analyses and articulating specific questions maintains focus on 
the data and analyses steps that will achieve objectives. The importance of identifying specific 
questions was covered with the discussion of data analysis objectives. Here, the emphasis is 
on repeatedly returning to those questions to keep the analysis on track.
For example, we might discover interesting insights during data exploration that could 
distract from the analysis’s original purpose. It can be tempting to follow every lead, regardless 
of whether it will help answer the main objective and questions. Focusing on the purpose of 
the analysis avoids wasting time on irrelevant findings. It is always possible to go back to the 
additional insights after the analysis that meets the stated purpose is completed.
In the OSS case, the objective was determining what was driving the decrease in sales and 
profits in the current year. What if, in the analysis of expenses, the depreciation was found to 
be higher in 2023 than in 2024? This may be an important finding, but it doesn’t contribute to 
knowing what is driving the decrease in sales and profits in 2025. In this case, note the find-
ing about depreciation and return to it after the current analysis is complete to avoid wasting 
time.
Consider Alternatives
Performing data analyses involves many choices–which questions to evaluate, what data are 
needed, which method to use, and how to best communicate the results. How should we con-
sider these alternatives? First, identify the available choices, rank them, then choose the highest 
ranked option.
As with all business decisions, weighing the cost of performing the analysis against its 
expected benefits is good practice. While we should only perform analyses where the benefits 
exceed the cost, the costs and benefits of performing an analysis cannot always be quantified. 
In these cases, think critically about the choices and select the option that best supports the 
purpose.
Consider the OSS analysis. They want to identify what is driving the decrease in sales and 
profits. The following data and analysis choices are options for answering this question: 
•	Data: Sales transactions 2022–2025 by region, competitor data, inflation rate.
•	Analysis methods: Descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, or prescriptive analytics. 
To select the best data for the analysis, rank the data by their relevance and availability. 
Data that are both relevant and available will rank higher than data that are relevant but 
not available or data that are irrelevant. In the OSS example, the sales transaction data are 
the most relevant and also available. The competitor data would be relevant but unavailable. 
The inflation rate might be useful, but it would only be one indication of changes in profits. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
1-24  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Finally, the methods of analysis that are most relevant for this question are descriptive and 
diagnostic methods.
Assess Risks
There are many risks to consider when performing data analyses, and it’s important to examine 
all aspects of the analysis to identify them. This begins with the data and extends to potential 
biases, including our own, that may be held by the stakeholders. Potential risks in four areas–
data, analyses, assumptions, and biases–can affect decisions. These risks are illustrated with 
the OSS example in Illustration 1.20.
ILLUSTRATION 1.20  Types of Risks
Risk
Description
OSS Example
Data
Choosing inappropriate 
data, or data that are 
incomplete or incorrect.
Are the transaction data we plan to analyze 
complete and accurate?
Analysis
Choosing an 
inappropriate method, or 
applying a data analysis 
method incorrectly.
Are the descriptive and diagnostic analysis methods 
the correct methods? Were the analyses performed 
correctly?
Assumptions
Not understanding or 
evaluating assumptions 
about the data or the 
results.
What assumptions were made when collecting data, 
and are they correct? For example, are we assuming 
that we have all the data? Are we assuming that the  
2023–2024 results are as expected? Perhaps they were 
higher than expected, and the 2024–2025 results did 
not decline as we initially thought.
Biases
Mental shortcuts that can 
affect decisions.
Do we have biases that could influence the data 
analysis? For example, assumptions about the cause 
of the sales decline could bias the preparation for 
the analysis or interpretation of the results.
A habit of critically considering inherent risks in the data analyses work performed by 
ourselves or others avoids unintentionally creating or using incorrect data.
Identify Knowledge
The next element of critical thinking in data analytics includes identifying knowledge gaps:
•	Recognizing when more knowledge is necessary to complete the analysis.
•	Acquiring knowledge from a reliable source.
•	Learning how to correctly apply it to the data analysis.
Performing the analysis for the OSS case requires understanding how wholesale distributors 
operate, how profit is calculated, and how to perform descriptive and diagnostic data analyses. 
There is also a technology component, as it is necessary to know how to use the available tech-
nology to download the data and perform the descriptive and diagnostic analyses.

--- PAGE 26 ---
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-25
Purpose
A
K
R
S
P
S
Stakeholders
Alternatives
Self-Reflection
Parties impacted by the data analysis
results.
The potential impacts guide
analysis and communication
choices.
The reason driving the questions
for the analysis.
Focusing on the purpose helps
select the best data, analysis,
interpretation, and
communication options.
Every choice should be the best
option available.
Generating and ranking
alternatives helps us make good
choices.
Consider all risks related to data,
strategy, biases, and assumptions.
Anticipating risks improves data
and analysis choices.
Proper analysis strategy and
interpretation of results ofen depends
on accounting, economics, industry,
statistics, and technology knowledge.
Applying knowledge provides
meaning to the data and to
the results.
Reviewing each choice throughout
the data analysis process (MOSAIC)
reveals what worked best.
Reflecting on lessons learned
helps improve future analyses.
Definition
Critical Thinking
Why It Matters
Knowledge
Risks
ILLUSTRATION 1.21  The Six 
Elements of Critical Thinking
Perform Self-Reflection
The final critical thinking element is investing in a “post-project audit” habit honestly and 
without self-criticism. A start-to-finish project review connects and synthesizes what hap-
pened and why. The professional development we gain by this practice, whether the project 
was a success, a struggle, or a failure, can be valuable for both individuals and teams.
When the analysis of the decline in sales and profit for OSS is complete, reflect on what 
worked well and what did not. For example, if you had difficultly downloading the data but 
eventually figured it out, then use that experience in future projects to avoid similiar issues. 
SPARKS: A Critical Thinking Toolkit
The mnenomic SPARKS represents the six elements of critical thinking. Considering each 
will help you continue to develop your critical thinking skills. Illustration 1.21 provides a 
summary of the elements of critical thinking in the SPARKS framework.
Critical thinking in accounting data analytics projects is essential because it forces us 
to anticipate impacts and issues and evaluate our choices. The results are better processes, 
improved judgments, and the ability to more provide value for our organizations, clients, and 
stakeholders. As you work through the data analysis process, apply SPARKS continuously. 
Doing so helps ensure you are performing the individual steps of the data analysis process 
(MOSAIC) effectively.

--- PAGE 27 ---
1-26  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Apply It 1.4
Integrate Critical 
Thinking with 
the Data Analysis 
Process 
Auditing   Consider CFW’s fraud risk assessment for LocalPics from Apply It 1.3. You were asked to 
identify and explain the data analysis steps you would perform during the risk assessment. Now, apply 
the six elements of critical thinking to each of those steps. Complete the last column in the table. Note 
that two elements are listed in each step, but it is possible that more elements could apply. 
Data Analysis 
Critical Thinking 
Element
Stage
Step
Explanation
Application
Plan
Motivation
Determine if theft is 
occurring.
Stakeholders  
Purpose
Objective
Identify if employees are 
stealing cash.
Purpose 
Risks
Strategy
Collect sales data and 
compare it to bank 
deposits.
Risks  
Knowledge
Analyze
Prepare the 
data 
Determine if the data 
needs to be cleaned or 
transformed.
Risks  
Self-reflection
Build 
information 
models
Calculate what cash 
deposits should be based 
on sales.
Purpose  
Alternatives
Explore the 
data
Examine the data for 
anomalies.
Alternatives 
Knowledge
Report
Interpret the 
results
Review analyses to ensure 
they are accurate and 
make sense.
Stakeholders 
Purpose
Communicate 
the results
Prepare a memo or 
presentation summarizing 
the findings.
Stakeholders  
Risks

