--- PAGE 1 ---
C H A PT E R 1
Data and Analytics in the 
Accounting Profession
Chapter Preview
Changes in data and technology are impacting the role of accountants in all areas of account-
ing. The accountants of the future must be agile, creative, data and technology literate profes-
sionals. They will be critically thinking problem-solvers who can use technology and data to 
drive business understanding and change. They need to “think outside the box” to create value 
using data and analyses. This chapter is an overview of how these changes are happening, the 
types of data and analytics new graduates are likely to encounter, and the skills they need to be 
successful in this changing environment.
Professional Insight: Why Does Data Analytics Matter  
for Your Career?
This chapter previews data and analytics in the accounting profession and the related skills 
needed for your future accounting career. Some quotes from leaders at two of the world’s larg-
est accounting firms puts the importance of these skills into perspective.
	
Roger O’Donnell, Global Head of Data and Analytics, in KPMG’s auditing practice:
Technology is not displacing accountants; rather, it is augmenting their ­technical 
­proficiency as well as their critical thinking and problem-solving skills to make 
more insightful decisions, reducing the risks and increasing the efficiency of produc-
ing financial statements and tax filings… But there’s a growing need for accounting 
students to learn how to harness and analyze financial and accounting data, as it 
can greatly enhance their abilities.1
	
Patty Pogemiller, Managing Director of Global Talent Experience for Deloitte:
Problem solving skills are essential in a client business like professional ser-
vices. Employers are looking for people who demonstrate an ability to think ana-
lytically and approach a problem in a structured and methodical way. Can they 
objectively analyze and solve an issue? And once they have a solution, they must 
have the ability to communicate it to others – their clients, managers and fellow 
team members.2 
1-0
1Forbes (2019). The next generation accountant. https://www.forbes.com/sites/insights-kpmg/2019/04/29/
the-next-generation-accountant/?sh=57090091ae67 (accessed April 2022). 
2U.S. News & World Report. What is an accountant? https://money.usnews.com/careers/best-jobs/accountant  
(accessed April 2022).

--- PAGE 2 ---
1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-1
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 1.1   Summarize how 
advances in data and technology 
are impacting accounting 
professionals.
•	 Data and Technology
•	 Analytics and Accounting Professional 
Practice
Match Data Analytics to 
Accounting Areas
 LO 1.2   Describe the stages of 
the data analysis process.
•	 Stage 1: Plan
•	 Stage 2: Analyze
•	 Stage 3: Report
•	 MOSAIC: Putting it All Together
Explain the Data Analysis 
Process for a Fraud Risk 
Assessment 
(Example: Auditing)
 LO 1.3   Identify the skills 
necessary to perform data 
analyses.
•	 Critical Thinking
•	 Data Literacy
•	 Technology Skills
•	 Communication Skills
Evaluate the Relationships 
between Skills and Tasks
(Example: Tax Accounting)
 LO 1.4   Explain how to apply 
a data analytics mindset to 
the data analysis process.
•	 Understand the Stakeholders
•	 Identify the Purpose
•	 Consider Alternatives
•	 Assess Risks
•	 Identify Knowledge
•	 Perform Self-Reflection
•	 SPARKS: A Critical Thinking Toolkit
Integrate Critical Thinking with 
the Data Analysis Process
(Example: Auditing)
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform.
1.1  How are Data and Analytics 
Transforming the Accounting Profession?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Summarize how advances in data and technology are impacting accounting professionals.
This is an exciting time to enter the accounting profession! New, user-friendly technology 
allows accountants to complete accounting functions, such as creating journal entries and 
preparing financial statements and reports, in a fraction of the time they used to take. Because 
these repetitive accounting functions can be automated, accountants can focus on activities 
that add value to their organizations, such as evaluating controls, providing financial insights, 
and performing analyses to aid in business decision-making.

--- PAGE 3 ---
1-2  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
This evolution of the accounting profession is also reflected in the professional certifica-
tion exams required to practice in the field:
•	The Certified Public Accountant (CPA) and the Certified Management Accountant 
(CMA) exams now include the topic of data analytics.
•	Beginning in 2020, the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) added a “Technol-
ogy and Analytics” section to the CMA exam. The IMA stated that the changes were 
implemented to “make the exam more relevant to the current job market.”
•	The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), in a joint effort with the 
National Association of the State Boards of Accountancy (NASBA), launched the CPA Evo-
lution in 2021. The CPA Evolution is a change in the CPA licensure model to “recognize the 
rapidly changing skills and competencies the practice of accounting requires today and will 
require in the future.”3 While the current CPA exam already includes data analytics, the 
new exam format, which will be implemented in 2024, will include more technology and 
data analytics in both the core and the discipline exams.
Data and Technology
As these changes to accounting professional exams show, data, analytics, and technology are 
changing the accounting profession. But what are data and analytics? Note the separation of 
the words “data” and “analytics.” While it is often referred to simply as “data analytics,” each is 
its own element–and it is important to think about them separately. Performing data analytics 
includes identifying both the data necessary for the analysis and the appropriate analysis method.
Data are raw figures and facts. Technology helps convert that data to information, 
which is the knowledge gained from the data. For example, sales transaction data will include 
the date sold, the product purchased, quantity sold, and price for each sale. We can get infor-
mation such as the total sales by product by summarizing the data (multiplying quantity sold 
by price) by product. Data analytics is the process of analyzing raw data to answer questions 
or provide insights.
The emergence of self-service business intelligence (SSBI) software has fostered the 
increased use of data and analytics. SSBI is now readily available and accessible by all business 
users. There are two key features of SSBI software:
•	It provides extended data processing capabilities for preparing data, analyzing data, and 
reporting data analysis results.
•	It is easy to use. No degree in computer science is required!
Several excellent SSBI tools are available, including Alteryx, Microsoft Excel, Power BI, 
and Tableau. These tools allow all businesses to be successful in the new data environment. 
Illustration 1.1 is an example of the SSBI software Alteryx. Alteryx lets users quickly design 
workflows that access, manipulate, analyze, and output data. Like all SSBI software, the inter-
face is user-friendly and does not require knowing how to program.
The workflow in Illustration 1.1 imports, cleans, filters, and exports results. In this exam-
ple, the user wants to do an analysis of U.S. transactions for a company. The workflow begins 
with an import of an Excel spreadsheet of all transactions. Next, the data is cleaned to remove 
null values and leading and trailing spaces. A null value indicates an unknown or missing 
value. (Later in the course you will learn the importance of cleaning data prior to analysis). 
Once the data are cleaned, they are filtered to separate transactions made in the United States 
from transactions made in other countries. Illustration 1.2 shows how long (run time) it took 
for the software to complete the workflow.
It took only 0.5 seconds to import, clean, filter, and export over 2,000 rows of data. Soft-
ware such as Alteryx can save accountants countless hours of tedious work.
The growing availability of data, the techniques and tools used to create value from them, 
and the ease with which these tools can be used have impacted how accountants, from audi-
tors to financial accountants, do their jobs every day.
3CPA Evolution. http://www.evolutionofcpa.org.

--- PAGE 4 ---
1.1  How are Data and Analytics Transforming the Accounting Profession?  1-3
Analytics and Accounting Professional Practice
Using self-service business intelligence tools has empowered accountants in different practice 
areas to use data and analytics to provide value-added services to their clients and employers.
Auditing
The use of analytics in the audit profession is growing:
•	Audits have expanded beyond sample-based testing to include analyses of entire popula-
tions of audit-relevant data.
•	Auditors can review entire data sets to identify all exceptions, anomalies, and outliers.
•	Data driven audits reduce the time the client spends gathering information for the auditor 
and allows more time for the analysis, making audits a better experience for everyone 
involved.
Both internal and external auditors use analytics to perform risk assessment and sub-
stantive procedures. Illustration 1.3 is an example of how analytics are used to perform risk 
assessment by showing the increase or decrease in each general ledger account for the current 
and prior year. Notice that the visual includes prior year amounts by showing them enclosed 
in a black border. The green bars represent current year amounts that are less than $3 million. 
The orange bars represent the current year amounts that are more than $3 million and should 
be investigated further. This type of analysis helps the auditor quickly identify the accounts 
that appear to have a higher risk of misstatement, so they can investigate further. 
ILLUSTRATION 1.2  Alteryx Workflow Run Time
OK
Alteryx Designer x64
Finished running in 0.5 seconds
Learn about AMP Engine
Don’t show this message again
ILLUSTRATION 1.1  Alteryx Software Workflow Example
Start Here.yxmd
Start Here.yxmd
New Workflow1*
New Workflow1*
Workflow ‒ Configuration
Workflow ‒ Configuration
Meta Info
Meta Info
Canvas
Canvas
Runtime
Runtime
Events
Events
Path:
Path:
?
Output
Data
File
Edit
View
Options
Help
Favorites
Text
Input
Data
Cleansing
Filter
Formula Sample
Sort
Join
Union
Text To
Columns
Browse
Summarize
∑
Parse
Transform
In/Out
Preparation
Join
In-Database
Documentation
Reporting
Spatial
Select
Input
Data
Export United
States
Transactions to
an Excel file
Import One Stop
Shop Transactions
Remove
null values,
leading
and trailing
spaces
Filter for United
States transactions
T
F
Workflow
Workflow
Type
Type
Standard Workflow
Standard Workflow
Analytic App
Analytic App
Macro:
Macro:
Standard
Standard

--- PAGE 5 ---
1-4  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
In addition to risk assessment, auditors can use data analytics to perform substantive 
analytical procedures that support the assertion that the financial records of an entity are 
complete, valid, and accurate. Illustration 1.4 is an example of this using data visualiza-
tion, which is the graphical representation of information and data.
ILLUSTRATION 1.4  Substantive 
Analytical Procedure Example
Actual vs. Expected Monthly Rental Revenue
$1,400,000
$1,200,000
$1,000,000
$800,000
$600,000
$400,000
$200,000
$0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
Actual Revenue
Expected Revenue
Source: AICPA Guide to Audit Data Analytics (page 80).
ILLUSTRATION 1.3  Audit Risk Assessment Example
5100 Cash
$Millions
Financial Statement Line Items Compared With Previous Year
Net Assets 5100–7120 Increase/(Decrease); Net Income 8100–8510 Increase/(Decrease)
6100 Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities
8360 Fixed Asset - Depreciation and Amortization
8510 Other Expense
8500 Interest Income
8400 Provision For Income Taxes
8370 Foreign Exchange Gain/Loss
8365 Intangible - Depreciation and Amortization
8350 Sales and Marketing
8340 General and Administrative
8300 Research and Development
8200 Operating Expenses
8100 Sales/Revenue
7120 Retained Earnings - Beginning of Year
7110 Contributed Surplus
7100 Share Capital (Note 7)
6500 Deferred Revenues
6400 Income Taxes
6300 Long-term Liabilities
6140 Income Taxes Payable
5710 Goodwill
5700 Other Assets
5600 Property, Plant, and Equipment
5560 Other Receivables - Long-term
5500 Prepaid Expenses
5350 Other Receivables - Short-term
5300 Accounts Receivable
5200 Investments
(20)
(10)
0
10
3.0
12.6
1.5
0.8
3.4
0.3
1.6
1.7
0.4
-
-
(0.1)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(5.0)
(13.3)
(0.5)
(5.0)
(3.1)
(1.0)
(4.2)
20
30
40
39.0
7.5
(7.0)
(5.8)
(6.9)
(7.7)
Balance
Sheet
Income
Statement
Prior Year
Amounts
Current Year, Pass
(Changes of Less than $3 Million)
Current Year, Investigate
(Changes of $3 Million or More)
Source: AICPA Guide to Audit Data Analytics (page 39). Reproduced with permission from AICPA.

