--- PAGE 19 ---
1-18  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Professional Insight: What Skills are Employers Looking For?
The following are excerpts from the EY Careers webpage:4
It’s clear that many of us will be working with technology that hasn’t yet been invented, 
solving problems that haven’t yet been identified. So, while technical skill sets are 
evolving faster than ever, many are becoming irrelevant or obsolete just 
as quickly. That’s why we recruit people today based on their mindset – 
not just their skillset. When you join us, we invest in your development, so you can 
continue to build the mindset and technology skillset to thrive.
What is an analytics mindset? You’ll understand the importance of analytics 
and data to your profession, with the ability to extract, transform and 
interpret the relevant data. You’ll be a natural problem-solver, able to trans-
late complex data into simple and useful insights. You’ll be comfortable shar-
ing these results with both internal and external stakeholders. You’ll also 
be committed to asking better questions to get relevant data and understand 
how to use it.
These are the “preferred knowledge skills” from a tax associate job posting for PwC: 
•	 Innovating through new and existing technologies, along with experimenting with 
digitization solutions; and,
•	 Working with large, complex data sets to build models and leverage data visu-
alization tools.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is disciplined reasoning used to investigate, understand, and evaluate an 
event, opportunity, or an issue. Reasoning is the human process of logically forming con-
clusions, judgments, or inferences from facts. Not only do employers want critical thinkers, 
but professional certification exams such as the CPA exam and the CMA exam also include 
assessment questions that test critical thinking skills. Critical thinking is the foundation of a 
data analytics mindset and should be integrated throughout the data analysis process. (Criti-
cal thinking will be explored and applied to the data analysis process at the end of the chapter.) 
Data Literacy
Data literacy is the ability to understand and communicate data. Gartner, Inc., a world lead-
ing research and advisory company, defines it in more detail, stating that data literacy is “the 
ability to read, write and communicate data in context, including an understanding of data 
sources and constructs, analytical methods and techniques applied, and the ability to describe 
the use of case application and resulting value.”5
Why is data literacy so important?
•	A study by the data visualization software company Qlik and the consulting firm Accen-
ture found that 63% of employees use data for decision making at least once a week.6
•	Further, a study by the consulting firm McKinsey & Company found that companies 
where employees consistently use data in decision-making are more likely to report reve-
nue growth of more than 10% in the past three years.7
4https://www.ey.com/en_us/careers/what-we-look-for 
5Gartner, Inc, 2018. Logan, V. Information as a second language: enabling data literacy for a digital society. 
21 September 2018 ID: G00365697.
6Qlik and Accenture (2020). The human impact of data literacy. Data Literacy Project. https:// 
thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact (accessed July 2022). 
7QuantumBlack AI by McKinsey, 2019. Catch them if you can: how leaders in data and analytics have pulled 
ahead. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/catch-them-if-you-
can-how-leaders-in-data-and-analytics-have-pulled-ahead (accessed July 2022). 

--- PAGE 20 ---
1.3  What is a Data Analytics Mindset?  1-19
ILLUSTRATION 1.16  Technology Skill Requirements in Entry Level Accounting Job Postings
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Percent
of Postings
Number
of Postings
Technology Skill Requirements
0
100
150
250
350
450
50
200
300
400
Excel
ERP
Database
Netsuite
Quickbooks
78%
69%
55%
7%
3%
We have emphasized the influence of technology on the accounting profession, the 
demand for technology skills, and that technology changes rapidly. But how do you develop 
technology skills if technology is always changing?
If mental agility is the ability to think and understand quickly, then technological agil-
ity is an awareness of the latest technological developments and a willingness to try new 
things. We can become technologically agile by learning new technology and developing the 
skills that help us to do so. In fact, being comfortable learning new technology leads to more 
agility. This “learn to learn” mindset is what employers are looking for in new employees.
While the ability to learn and use new technology is important, so is in-depth knowledge 
of specific software packages essential to accountants. Microsoft Excel is a perfect example 
of an essential skill, which Illustration 1.16 demonstrates is one desired by most employers.
Finally, tools are just that–tools. They help accountants do their jobs more effectively, but 
they do not replace professional judgment or critical thinking, and they do not make deci-
sions. In-depth accounting and business knowledge are what differentiates accountants from 
machines. Technology has just become an important part of that knowledge.
Communication Skills
Further evaluation of the Robert Half job postings reveals more skills required for entry level 
accounting positions (Illustration 1.17). Critical thinking skills are mentioned in 73% of the 
postings, closely followed by communication skills at 66%.
The ability to communicate is important for all aspects of your accounting career. Recall 
that the managing director for Deloitte stated staff members must be able to communicate 
solutions to others. The Professional Insight feature at the beginning of this chapter also 
emphasized the need for strong communication skills. The EY careers website post mentions 
“sharing these results with both internal and external stakeholders” which clearly indicates 
that communicating the results of data analyses is a critical skill for new graduates.
These examples show that the ability to read, write, and communicate with data is a skill 
that is critical for success. 
Technology Skills
Along with data literacy skills, accountants must know how to use technology to work with 
data. An analysis of over 500 entry-level accounting job postings for graduates with a bach-
elor of science degree in accounting confirms these skills are highly sought by employers.8 
­Illustration 1.16 shows an analysis of the technology skills listed in the Robert Half July 2022 
postings. Notice that most of the job postings required that applicants have strong Excel skills 
and more than half the postings are looking for ERP and database skills.
8This data was collected by the authors from roberthalf.com in July, 2022. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
1-20  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Communicating data analysis results requires specific skills: 
•	Writing clear and effective memos and reports.
•	Preparing successful presentations.
•	Creating meaningful data visualizations.
•	Telling compelling data stories.
Data visualization is particularly important because it is used to perform data analy-
sis and to communicate the results of data analysis. Data visualization is introduced in the 
foundations of data analysis chapter, and those skills are used throughout the course. The 
communication chapter also explores data visualization best practices, as well as how to com-
municate data analysis results.
ILLUSTRATION 1.17  More Skill Requirements in Entry Level Accounting Job Postings
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
80%
70%
Other Skill Requirements
Percent
of Postings
Number
of Postings
0
400
66%
31%
31%
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
Critical
Thinking
Communication
Social
Creativity
Quantitative
7%
73%
Apply It 1.3
Evaluate the 
Relationship 
between Skills and 
Tasks
Tax Accounting   You are a new tax associate at CFW assigned to work on the LocalPics corporate 
tax preparation. Match the following skills with the tasks that you will be performing. Skills can be 
used once, more than once, or not at all. Each task will require at least two skills and often more 
than two.
•	 Critical thinking
•	 Data literacy
•	 Technological agility
•	 Communication skills
Task
Skill
Gather relevant data.
Compare to prior year filings.
Prepare an analysis of changes from prior year.
Compare to similar organizations.
Upload current year data to tax preparation 
software.
Upload current year and prior year data to 
data analysis software.
Prepare a presentation on current tax liability 
for LocalPics senior management.

--- PAGE 22 ---
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset Applied?  1-21
SOLUTION
Task
Skill
Gather relevant data.
Critical thinking and data literacy
Compare to prior year filings.
Critical thinking and technological agility
Prepare an analysis of changes from prior 
year.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Compare to similar organizations.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year data to tax preparation 
software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Upload current year and prior year data to 
data analysis software.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility
Prepare a presentation on current tax liability 
for LocalPics senior management.
Critical thinking, data literacy, and 
technological agility, and communication
1.4  How is a Data Analytics Mindset 
Applied?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➍
Explain how to apply a data analytics mindset to the data analysis process.
You have learned that a data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically thinking 
through the planning, analysis, and interpretation of data results before making and commu-
nicating a professional choice or decision. The data analysis process requires applying critical 
thinking skills at each stage:
•	Stage 1: Taking the time to critically create and evaluate a data analysis plan will ensure 
you have considered all possible aspects of the analysis.
•	Stage 2: Preparing data, building information models, and exploring data also require 
thinking critically as you move through the analyze stage of the project. 
•	Stage 3: Finally, critical thinking will help you interpret and communicate findings in 
the results stage.
There are six elements of critical thinking to consider when performing data analytics: 
stakeholders, purpose, alternatives, risks, knowledge, and self-reflection (Illustration 1.18). 
Keep in mind that these elements are not sequential, rather they are recursive. In other words, 
the order in which you consider the elements is not as important as continually thinking 
through them.

