--- PAGE 15 ---
1-14  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
the profit margin analysis can be explored to find relationships, patterns, or insights that help 
explain why profit has decreased from 2024 to 2025. Sales is a significant driver of profit, so the 
sales data for Canada and Mexico can be explored for insights. Illustration 1.13 is an analysis 
of sales by country and region for Canada and Mexico.
ILLUSTRATION 1.13  Change in Sales by Country and Region for One Stop Shop
–100%
Mexico
Atlantic
Provinces
Central
Canada
Northern
Territories
Prairie
Provinces
West
Coast
Center-
Mexico
East-
Mexico
North-
Mexico
South-
Mexico
West-
Mexico
Canada
–50%
0%
50%
100%
Percent
Diﬀerence
in Total
Sales
150%
200%
300%
Percent Change in Sales
2023
2024
2025
This analysis shows there are many regions in both countries where sales are declining. 
Data   You can explore the OSS data yourself using Excel, Tableau, or Power BI.
Stage 3: Report
The goal of this stage is to determine if the analyses met the project’s objectives and then to 
share the results. Interpreting the analyses and communicating the results is a crucial stage–
an amazing analysis that does not meet the project’s objectives is useless. Moreover, if the 
results are not communicated effectively, then the analyses and recommendations cannot be 
acted on. 
Interpret Results
Data analysis interpretation is the process of reviewing analyses to be sure they make sense 
based on the project’s objective and that the results are valid and reliable. Imagine that you 
or someone else prepared the analysis of profit for OSS shown in Illustration 1.12. Recall that 
OSS’s objective is to determine what is driving the decrease in profit from 2024 to 2025. Does 
the analysis meet the objective?
•	It is a good start. The visualization in Illustration 1.12 shows that Canada and Mexico had 
declines in profit, whereas the United States had a small increase in profit.
•	However, the analysis is not finished. The next step is to dig deeper into the decreases to 
find out why Canada and Mexico had such large declines.

--- PAGE 16 ---
1.2  What are the Stages of the Data Analysis Process?  1-15
Communicate Results
The results of a data analysis project can be communicated orally, with visuals, or in writing. 
Typically, data analysis communication will include data visualizations (Illustrations 1.12 and 
1.13). Communication can also include dashboards (Illustration 1.14).
ILLUSTRATION 1.14  Communicating Using Dashboards: One Stop Shop Profit Analysis
Change in Percent Profit Margin by Product
One Stop Shop Profit Analysis 
Baby Food
Beverages
Cereal
Clothes
Cosmetics
Fruits
Household
Meat
Office Supplies
Personal Care
–60%
–50%
–40%
–30%
–20%
–10%
0%
% Difference in Avg. Profit Margin Ratio
Product
Name
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
2025
Profit by Country and Year
Profit Margin Trend by Country
0.4
0.2
0.0
2022
2023
2024
2025
0.38404
Year of Order Date
Avg.
Profit
Margin
Ratio
0.36957
0.36020
0.39142
0.37797
0.36853
0.34280
0.38447
Canada
Mexico
United States
Canada
$50M
$100M
$0M
Mexico
United States
Total
Profit
2022
2023
2024
2025
The dashboard in Illustration 1.14 communicates changes in profit to OSS’s management:
•	The percent change in profit by country from prior year (2024–2025).
•	Total profit by country (2022–2025).
•	How profit for each country has changed from the prior year.
Management can use this analysis to monitor profit. For example, it seems like OSS’s 
profits have decreased in all products except cereal, clothes, office supplies, and personal care. 
Like the other steps in the data analysis process, communication is also discussed in more 
detail later in the course.
MOSAIC: Putting it All Together
Created by arranging tiny pieces of different colored tiles into patterns, mosaics are visual 
art forms that evoke meaning and emotion. To easily remember the steps in the data analysis 
process, imagine using data to create a mosaic that will tell a story. Like the artists who use 

--- PAGE 17 ---
1-16  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
creative and logical processes to reveal meaning about the world around them through art, 
accountants use data analytics to interpret the meaning of data and reveal business insights to 
help organizations meet their goals. Illustration 1.15 provides a visual representation of the 
MOSAIC data analysis process.
ILLUSTRATION 1.15  The Data Analysis Process
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1.  Prepare data
2. Build information
     models
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1
This course will cover each aspect of MOSAIC.
Apply It 1.2
Explain the Data 
Analysis Process 
for a Fraud Risk 
Assessment 
Auditing   LocalPics (LP) is a busy movie theater chain with hundreds of sales each day and thou-
sands on the weekends. LocalPics was tipped off by an employee that some workers were stealing the 
cash from ticket sales. Unfortunately, the anonymous person did not identify in which of the seven 
theaters the theft was happening. The CPA firm, CFW, has been hired to perform a fraud risk assess-
ment for the company.
Identify the steps in the data analysis process for the fraud risk assessment, and provide a brief 
explanation of each.
Data Analysis Stage
Step
Explanation
Plan
Analyze
Report

--- PAGE 18 ---
1.3  What is a Data Analytics Mindset?  1-17
SOLUTION
Data Analysis Stage
Step
Explanation
Plan
Motivation
Discover if theft is occurring.
Objective
Determine if any employees are 
stealing cash.
Strategy
Collect sales data and compare to 
bank deposits.
Analyze
Prepare the data
Determine if the data needs to be 
cleaned or transformed.
Build information models
Calculate what cash deposits should 
be based on sales.
Explore the data
Examine the data for anomalies.
Report
Interpret
Review analyses to be sure they are 
accurate and make sense.
Communicate
Prepare a memo or presentation 
summarizing the findings.
1.3  What is a Data Analytics 
Mindset?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Identify the skills necessary to perform data analyses.
A data analytics mindset is the professional habit of critically thinking through the plan-
ning, analysis, and reporting of data analysis results before making and communicating a 
professional choice or decision. Individuals with a data analytics mindset are inquisitive. 
They always ask “why” when interpreting results, they are open to learning new technolo-
gies, and they evaluate their own thinking. How can you develop a data analytics mindset? 
Focus on developing skills such as critical thinking, data literacy, technological agility, and 
communication skills.
The shortage of employees with these data analytics skills has led to increased demand 
for data and analytics education in all business programs, and there are many available degree 
and certificate programs for data analytics. While all accounting professionals do not need 
a specialized degree or certificate, they do need to develop the skill set needed to effectively 
work with data.

--- PAGE 19 ---
1-18  CHAPTER 1  Data and Analytics in the Accounting Profession
Professional Insight: What Skills are Employers Looking For?
The following are excerpts from the EY Careers webpage:4
It’s clear that many of us will be working with technology that hasn’t yet been invented, 
solving problems that haven’t yet been identified. So, while technical skill sets are 
evolving faster than ever, many are becoming irrelevant or obsolete just 
as quickly. That’s why we recruit people today based on their mindset – 
not just their skillset. When you join us, we invest in your development, so you can 
continue to build the mindset and technology skillset to thrive.
What is an analytics mindset? You’ll understand the importance of analytics 
and data to your profession, with the ability to extract, transform and 
interpret the relevant data. You’ll be a natural problem-solver, able to trans-
late complex data into simple and useful insights. You’ll be comfortable shar-
ing these results with both internal and external stakeholders. You’ll also 
be committed to asking better questions to get relevant data and understand 
how to use it.
These are the “preferred knowledge skills” from a tax associate job posting for PwC: 
•	 Innovating through new and existing technologies, along with experimenting with 
digitization solutions; and,
•	 Working with large, complex data sets to build models and leverage data visu-
alization tools.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is disciplined reasoning used to investigate, understand, and evaluate an 
event, opportunity, or an issue. Reasoning is the human process of logically forming con-
clusions, judgments, or inferences from facts. Not only do employers want critical thinkers, 
but professional certification exams such as the CPA exam and the CMA exam also include 
assessment questions that test critical thinking skills. Critical thinking is the foundation of a 
data analytics mindset and should be integrated throughout the data analysis process. (Criti-
cal thinking will be explored and applied to the data analysis process at the end of the chapter.) 
Data Literacy
Data literacy is the ability to understand and communicate data. Gartner, Inc., a world lead-
ing research and advisory company, defines it in more detail, stating that data literacy is “the 
ability to read, write and communicate data in context, including an understanding of data 
sources and constructs, analytical methods and techniques applied, and the ability to describe 
the use of case application and resulting value.”5
Why is data literacy so important?
•	A study by the data visualization software company Qlik and the consulting firm Accen-
ture found that 63% of employees use data for decision making at least once a week.6
•	Further, a study by the consulting firm McKinsey & Company found that companies 
where employees consistently use data in decision-making are more likely to report reve-
nue growth of more than 10% in the past three years.7
4https://www.ey.com/en_us/careers/what-we-look-for 
5Gartner, Inc, 2018. Logan, V. Information as a second language: enabling data literacy for a digital society. 
21 September 2018 ID: G00365697.
6Qlik and Accenture (2020). The human impact of data literacy. Data Literacy Project. https:// 
thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact (accessed July 2022). 
7QuantumBlack AI by McKinsey, 2019. Catch them if you can: how leaders in data and analytics have pulled 
ahead. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/catch-them-if-you-
can-how-leaders-in-data-and-analytics-have-pulled-ahead (accessed July 2022). 

