--- PAGE 1 ---
3-0
C H A PT E R 3
Motivations and 
Objectives for 
Data Analysis
Chapter Preview
Data analytics is a rapidly evolving and exciting field, and there is a demand within it for 
accounting professionals who can use new tools to analyze large amounts of data. Analyzing 
data and extracting information from it leads to informed decisions, and businesses today 
want people with these skills.
	
But a data analytics project does not start with a deep dive into the data. Planning the proj-
ect, including understanding the motivation for performing it and developing its specific goals, 
is equally important. Data analytics can be costly, complex, and time consuming. A detailed 
plan links the project’s motivation with its objective and key questions, which helps us select 
the best analysis method. Without a plan, it is possible to overlook important information or 
critical questions, which could make the analysis less effective or even useless.
	
The first stage of the data analytics process is planning. It includes identifying the motiva-
tion for the project, which helps determine the objective. A project’s objective drives everything 
from the questions asked to the analysis choices we make to find the answers to them. This 
chapter examines the link between understanding why the project is necessary and developing 
a focused project objective.
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1. Prepare data
 
2. Build information
     models
     
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1


--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter Roadmap  3-1
Professional Insight: Why do Motivations and Objectives Matter 
for Data Analysis Projects?
Georgia lived with her parents while earning an undergraduate accounting degree at the local 
university. Immediately after graduation, she completed an auditing internship during busy 
season. She is entering a master’s program of accounting in the fall semester.
On the first day of my internship, I learned professional accountants follow a process 
each time they work on a data ­analyses project. First, they understand the moti-
vation for their projects, which in turn influences their specific work objectives. 
When they are clear about their motivation and objectives, they can plan a suc-
cessful strategy for their data analyses projects.
I also learned that professional accountants are motivated by more than personal career 
goals. Auditors want to add value to their firms and clients by assuring them that their 
financial statements are reliable and accurate. After all, good information means better 
capital markets, lending decisions, government relationships, and business partnerships.
This helped me realize that I was also motivated by more than just getting that great 
job after college. I want to make a difference in the world, and I want to honor my 
parents’ hard work raising me to be successful. This awareness of my motivations has 
helped me become more committed to my objective and my studies!
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 3.1   Summarize the relationship 
between motivations, objectives, and 
data analysis questions.
•	 Understanding Motivation
•	 Clear Objectives Lead to Focused  
Data Analysis Questions
Link Motivation to Objectives 
(Example: Auditing)
 LO 3.2   Demonstrate how to develop 
descriptive questions.
•	 Develop Descriptive Questions
•	 Descriptive Analyses Examples
Describe Customers’ Buying 
Behaviors
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 3.3   Demonstrate how to develop 
diagnostic questions.
•	 Develop Diagnostic Questions
•	 Diagnostic Analyses Examples
Determine the Risk of Material 
Misstatement of Sales
(Example: Auditing)
 LO 3.4   Demonstrate how to develop 
predictive questions.
•	 Develop Predictive Questions
•	 Predictive Analyses Examples
Plan a Sales Trend Analysis
(Example: Managerial Accounting)
 LO 3.5   Demonstrate how to develop 
prescriptive questions.
•	 Develop Prescriptive questions
•	 Prescriptive Analyses Examples
Prescribe Optimal Sales Mix
(Example: Managerial Accounting)
 LO 3.6   Describe motivations and 
objectives for data analytics in 
professional practice.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing
•	 Financial Accounting
•	 Managerial Accounting
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Motivations to 
Professional Practice Areas
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software referenced 
in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform. 


--- PAGE 3 ---
3-2  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
3.1  How Does Motivation Inform 
Objective-Based Data Analysis Questions?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Summarize the relationship between motivations, objectives, and data analysis questions.
It is easier to stay focused on a task’s objective when we know why we are performing it in the 
first place. Understanding the motivation to perform an analysis and identifying its objective 
also helps create specific, objective-based questions. After all, it is impossible to get the right 
answers if we do not know what to ask.
Understanding Motivation
Motivation in data analytics in accounting is the reason the analysis is being performed. The 
“why” behind a project can vary, but data analysis projects are typically motivated by four 
forces:
•	Opportunity: Evaluating new opportunities that will benefit the organization.
•	Professional issues: Evaluating changes due to new laws, regulations, or changes in 
accounting practices.
•	Problem solving: Solving a problem or issue that the organization is facing.
•	Process and performance assessment: Understanding and improving the processes 
and performance of the organization.
­Illustration 3.1 describes some common motivations and includes an example from a com-
pany called Super Scooters, which manufactures and sells a variety of scooters. 
In each Super Scooters example, the motivation for the analysis is to either describe the 
situation’s potential, diagnose the causal factors or determine operational change, predict 
sales revenues or net income, or prescribe the best course of action. Regardless of the moti-
vation’s source, the data analyses choices we make depend on what can be gained from the 
analysis. If its potential benefits outweigh the costs of doing it, then stakeholders will consider 
it a valuable analysis. 
Clear Objectives Lead to Focused Data Analysis 
Questions
You just learned that the four common motivators for data analytics in accounting are oppor-
tunities, regulatory changes, solving problems, and process and performance evaluation. For 
example, a company with an underperforming business unit will evaluate its performance to 
understand why. A successful data analytics project depends on a more specific statement, 
which will then inform the questions that will be asked in the analysis. 


--- PAGE 4 ---
3.1  How Does Motivation Inform Objective-Based Data Analysis Questions?  3-3
Determine the Objective
The objective of a data analysis project naturally follows the motivation. Let’s go back to that 
common motivation for data analysis, an underperforming business unit:
•	The motivation is to solve a problem by evaluating the unit’s performance to discover why 
it is underperforming.
•	It is necessary to be more specific because poor performance could have several causes.
•	The first step is to specify the areas of performance to investigate and articulate what 
those investigations should accomplish.
In other words, it is important to clarify the goal of the data analysis.
Every data analysis project begins with setting an objective, which is the project’s goal. 
It is a statement that details what the project will accomplish. A new example can illustrate 
how to determine a project’s objective. Omni Restaurants owns restaurants across five regions 
in the United States. The financial information for the current year by region is shown in 
Illustration 3.2.
Illustration 3.2 shows that Omni is losing money in one region:
•	Motivation: They are concerned about the losses in Region 1 and want to understand 
what is driving them.
•	General objective: Eliminate those financial losses.
ILLUSTRATION 3.1  Motivation for Data Analytics in Accounting
Motivation
Description
Role of Data Analysis
Super Scooters Example
Opportunities
New, potentially advantageous 
occasions or channels.
Reliable evidence justifies new products 
and services.
Evidence to justify changing resource 
allocations and capital sourcing.
•	 New scooter models. 
•	 New services, such as scooter 
training classes.
•	 Store expansions.
Professional 
Issues and 
Requirements
Compliance with new or upcoming 
regulations, laws, or changes in 
practices.
Understanding changes improves 
responses.
Evaluating new accounting regulations  
can positively impact client financial 
statements.
The local government may 
have recently allowed scooters, 
unmotorized and motorized, on 
all paved bicycle paths and road 
lanes in the city.
Problem 
Solving
Solving problems related to risks and 
issues around clients, technologies, 
employees, operations, and supply 
chains.
Solving problems to minimize productivity 
losses.
Super Scooters may need to 
investigate why a particular 
scooter is no longer selling as 
well as it did, or why it is not 
selling as well as their other 
scooter products.
Process and 
Performance 
Assessment
Evaluating financial statements for 
material misstatements or risks of 
material misstatement.
Inspecting operational efficiency 
and effectiveness at the individual, 
functional, unit, and business levels.
Audit data analytics can provide risk 
assessment and substantive audit 
evidence.
Evaluating the success of a new strategy 
helps management make future decisions.
Super Scooters may need to 
evaluate the contribution margin 
and inventory turnover for each 
product line, or the performance 
of each salesperson.


--- PAGE 5 ---
3-4  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
ILLUSTRATION 3.2  Omni Restaurants Financial Performance by Region
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
Region 4
Region 5
Total
Dine in Sales
$226,800
$333,396
$367,569
$405,245
$446,783
$1,779,793
Takeout Sales
$151,200
$222,264
$245,046
$270,163
$297,855
$1,186,528
Total 
Revenues
$378,000
$555,660
$612,615
$675,408
$744,638
$2,966,321
Cost of Goods 
Sold
$  86,940
$122,245
$122,523
$128,328
$134,035
$   594,071
Gross Profit
$291,060
$433,415
$490,092
$547,080
$610,603
$2,372,250
Lease
$  90,000
$  61,500
$  63,038
$  64,613
$  66,229
$   345,380
Marketing
$  30,000
$  25,000
$  25,000
$  25,000
$  25,000
$   130,000
Salaries
$200,835
$204,030
$224,943
$236,190
$248,000
$1,113,998
Other  
Expenses
$    5,250
$    4,000
$    4,500
$    5,000
$    5,500
$     24,250
Total S G & A 
Expenses
$326,085
$294,530
$317,481
$330,803
$344,729
$1,613,628
  Depreciation
$  36,960
$  36,960
$  36,960
$  36,960
$  36,960
$   184,800
  Interest
$  23,621
$  20,668
$  17,716
$  14,763
$  11,810
$     88,578
Earnings 
Before Tax
($95,606)
$  81,257
$117,935
$164,554
$217,104
$   485,244
  Income Tax 
Expenses
0
$  29,526
$  42,853
$  59,344
$  77,911
$   209,634
Net Income 
(Loss)
($95,606)
$  51,731
$  75,082
$105,210
$139,193
$   275,610
Now we have moved from motivation to objective. But the objective is so general that it is 
difficult to decide where to begin the analysis. A specific objective would narrow the analysis’ 
focus. In the Omni case, only one region is experiencing losses:
•	Specific objective: Identify the factors driving the losses in Region 1.
After the objective is clear and specific, formulate the questions that will achieve that objective 
once they are addressed. 


--- PAGE 6 ---
3.1  How Does Motivation Inform Objective-Based Data Analysis Questions?  3-5
ILLUSTRATION 3.3  Flowchart for Developing Data Analysis Questions
Does the question
address the
objective?
Start
No
Yes
Does the
question address
one topic?
No
Yes
Is the
question
measurable?
No
Yes
Can we obtain
the data needed
to answer the
question?
Drop the
question.
Keep the
question.
No
Yes
Can the
question be
changed to be
measurable?
Yes
No
Revise the
question to
address the
objective of
the analysis.
Break the
question down
into sub-
questions.
Articulate Questions
Asking the wrong questions leads to answers that do not address the objective. Good ques-
tions are clear, concise, and measurable. So, how are good questions developed? Evaluate each 
question as to whether it addresses the objective, focuses on a single issue, is measurable, and 
if the data necessary to answer it are available. If the question does not meet this criteria, then 
either revise it, break it down, or drop it. Use the flowchart in Illustration 3.3 to develop 
specific data analysis questions.
A critical thinking approach to question development can help with this process. Recall 
that thinking critically when performing data analytics involves considering those who are 
impacted by the analysis, its purpose, considering a variety of alternatives at each step, con-
trolling for risks, acquiring the right information or knowledge, and reflecting on past and 
current projects.


--- PAGE 7 ---
3-6  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
2015
2018
2022
2024
Super Scooters was
founded in 2015 by Calvin
Tull and Lyla Franklin,
who own 60% of the
company. The remaining
40% is owned by an
investment company
(20%) and Super Scooters
manager level employees
(20%).
The market for motorized
scooters exploded in 2018
with the emergence of
companies that provide
scooter-sharing services
in cities and at universities.
Super Scooters secured a
contract beginning in
2022 to produce scooters
for the company Lime.
Sales for the Celeritas
and Kicks scooter models
have been decreasing
while costs are rising.
$
$
ILLUSTRATION 3.4  Super Scooters Company Timeline
Super Scooters is now in its third year of the contract with Lime, and they are unsure if 
they have made the right production decisions. Sales seem to be decreasing for some models, 
and costs are rising. Calvin and Lyla asked you to help them do three things:
	 1.	 Understand which models have decreasing sales and why.
	 2.	 Forecast future warranty expenses.
	 3.	 Determine the most profitable product mix for production.
Use the critical thinking framework, SPARKS, to identify the motivation, objectives, and 
questions relevant to the analysis Calvin and Lyla would like you to perform. Illustration 3.5 
summarizes how critical thinking helps evaluate motivations, objectives, and questions.
1A privately held company is one that does not sell their stock on public exchanges.
The Role of Critical Thinking
Let’s use the Super Scooters example to show the importance of critically evaluating moti-
vation, objectives, and questions at this stage of the data analysis process. Assume you are 
an accountant for the company Super Scooters. Super Scooters is a privately held company1 
that produces three models of motorized scooters (two electric and one gas-powered) and one 
non-motorized scooter (Illustration 3.4). 


--- PAGE 8 ---
3.1  How Does Motivation Inform Objective-Based Data Analysis Questions?  3-7
ILLUSTRATION 3.5  Thinking Critically About Motivations and Objectives
A
P
S
Considering the perspectives of stakeholders
helps identify the objective and develop good
questions.
Evaluating diﬀerent methods of analysis
increases the likelihood of selecting the best
option for the project’s purpose.
Being aware of potential risks makes it possible
to also mitigate them when evaluating
motivation, objectives, and questions.
Successfully completing a project requires
confirming we have the necessary knowledge
to do so or doing additional research to obtain
that knowledge.
Understanding the purpose of the analysis
makes it easier to apply the experience of
performing it to future data analytics contexts
and tasks.
Similarly, considering past experiences can
help identify objectives and develop questions.
Assessing whether you should have
performed the analyses may depend on
whether the information lead to better
decisions by management. If it did not, then
consider why. Only then can you compare
expected net benefits to the actual net
benefits.
It may be tempting to make Calvin and Lyla
happy with a positive outlook in the
predictive model. Be aware of that bias and
develop objectives and questions that will
not be influenced by it.
One purpose of the Super Scooters analysis
is to predict future sales and expenses.
If you do not know how to prepare a
predictive analysis, you must do one of two
things:
• Learn how to do the analysis.
• Hire someone to prepare the predictive
   analysis.
Develop several alternative methods
for performing the analysis to
describe performance over the
past year.
Consider how likely each option is to
provide valuable information.
Rank the alternatives and choose the one
with the highest expected value.
Based on the objectives, the purpose is to:
• Describe what is happening now
   and diagnose issues related to poor
   performance.
• Predict future sales.
• Prescribe a profitable sales mix.
The internal stakeholders are Lyla and Calvin.
Their motivation is to better understand
company performance.
The objective is to describe current
performance, diagnose issues related to
poor performance, predict future sales, and
make recommendations for improvements.
Critically thinking through the purpose of
data analyses is the link between a defined
objective and specific questions:
The questions will be diﬀerent depending on
whether the purpose is to describe and
diagnose current conditions or predict and
prescribe future outcomes.
• A purpose is the reason something is
  done or created.
• An objective is something we plan to do,
  or a goal.
Why It Matters
Critical Thinking
Element
Super Scooters Example
Alternatives
Purpose
Stakeholders
K
R
S
Risks
Knowledge
Self-Reflection


--- PAGE 9 ---
3-8  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
3.2  What are Descriptive Objectives?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➋
Demonstrate how to develop descriptive questions.
A data analysis project with the objective to understand something that is currently happen-
ing or that has happened requires descriptive questions. These types of questions are answered 
using descriptive analytics. Descriptive questions are often the first asked in any analysis 
because understanding the data is necessary before beginning more advanced analyses.
Develop Descriptive Questions
Descriptive questions are designed to better understand data to answer business questions. 
To develop good descriptive questions, first identify the objective of the analysis, then break 
that down into questions. Remember, a good question is one that relates to the objective, is 
specific, measurable, and can be answered with the available data.
Apply It 3.1
Link Motivation 
to Objectives
Auditing   Best friends Luanne and Maxine had been making baked goods for a friend who owned 
a local coffee shop. Their delicious baked goods soon had so many fans that Luanne and Maxine had 
to rent commercial kitchen space to keep up with demand. Now their business, Best Bakes Bakery, 
provides baked goods for a variety of coffee shops and restaurants.
They want to expand their operations into other states and are looking for potential investors. 
They believe a CPA’s opinion on their financial statements will help convince investors to invest in 
their company.
The owners hired your CPA firm to prepare a review of their financial statements. Best Bakes 
Bakery is the first bakery business for your firm, and you are the external auditor assigned to the 
engagement. Your supervisor asked you to use data analytics for the risk assessment:
•	 You have the last three years of financial statement data and must calculate several ratios rele-
vant to the company’s operations.
•	 Your supervisor believes the analysis will identify areas of potentially higher risk of material 
misstatement.
1.	 Which category of motivation applies to this scenario?
2.	 Who are the stakeholders in your data analysis?
3.	 What is the objective of your analysis?
SOLUTION
1.	 The motivation is process and performance evaluation. The analysis of financial ratios will pro-
vide information relevant to the risk assessment of the potential for material misstatements.
2.	 You, your audit firm, and the client are the internal stakeholders. The client’s investors and 
creditors are the external stakeholders.
3.	 The objective of the analysis is to determine the potential risk of material misstatements in the 
financial statements.


