--- PAGE 31 ---
3-30  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
Auditing
Auditors perform data analyses to verify financial statement information is not materially 
misstated. Their purpose is providing a professional opinion about whether the financial 
statements provide reliable, accurate information for the client’s primary stakeholders, which 
include company owners and investors and creditors in the capital markets and financial 
institutions. 
Accounting Information Systems
Motivations for data analyses in AIS can range widely in scope. Illustration 3.32 provides a 
summary of typical AIS data analysis motivations, objectives, and questions.
ILLUSTRATION 3.32  Motivations, Objectives, and Questions for AIS Data Analytics
Motivation
Objective
Question
Investing in new technologies.
Determine the technology 
with the highest return on 
investment.
What are the labor cost savings 
if we adopt a new technology?
Increasing security of AIS 
assets, including data.
Determine how many security 
breaches or attempted 
breaches have occurred.
What is the total number of 
attempted security breaches 
per day?
Innovations in operational 
processes, either human 
or computer, to improve 
processes.
Identify inefficient processes.
Which processes take the 
longest?
Improving system 
performance, such as 
processing time, reliability, 
and availability.
Evaluate processing time for 
monthly financial statement 
reporting.
How many hours does it take 
to process financial statements 
each month?
Improvements in AIS system 
maintenance.
Evaluate how long it takes to 
address system maintenance 
issues.
How long does it take to 
resolve maintenance requests?
Improvements in data 
integrity.
Determine how often data 
must be corrected.
How many corrections were 
made to data in the last month?
Although the list of questions in Illustration 3.32 is not exhaustive, the questions are a 
starting point for conducting analyses to address them.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 3.1: Understand AIS 
Stakeholders
Understanding the stakeholders’ motivations helps accurately identify the objectives of anal-
yses. Stakeholders in AIS data analysis projects can be internal or external to the organization 
(Stakeholders):
•	 Internal stakeholders include the chief financial officer, internal auditors, managers, chief in-
formation officer, and employees. They want to understand and improve processes, so objec-
tives focus on specific aspects of internal processes and how to improve them.
•	 External stakeholders may include investors, external auditors, customers, and vendors. 
These stakeholders are motivated by increased return on investment, so the projects with the 
greatest potential to offer a return on any investment are usually prioritized. 


--- PAGE 32 ---
3.6  What are Data Analytics Motivations and Objectives in Professional Practice?  3-31
Illustration 3.33 includes examples of motivations, objectives, and questions in auditing 
data analytics.
ILLUSTRATION 3.33  Motivations, Objectives, and Questions for Auditing Data Analytics
Motivation
Objective
Question
Evaluate the risk of 
material misstatement of 
revenue.
Determine if there are any 
unusual changes in revenue 
compared to prior years.
Are there any unusual trends 
or changes in sales from prior 
years?
Evaluate the risk of 
material misstatement 
in the company’s general 
ledger accounts.
Analyze balances in the 
company’s general ledger to 
identify unusual changes from 
prior year.
Are any changes in general 
ledger balances higher 
than our specified material 
amount?
Evaluate the risk of 
fraudulent payments.
Verify employees are not receiving 
unauthorized payments.
Are there any vendors in the 
vendor file with the same 
address as an employee?
Verify physical inventory 
and fixed asset counts.
Test for existence of assets.
Do inventory counts match 
amounts on the balance sheet?
Note that the motivation identifies a specific aspect of the audit. The objective states the 
goal of the analysis. The third column in the illustration provides an example of a specific 
question the auditor can address with the analysis. Audit analytics are used to perform risk 
assessment, substantive analytical procedures, and to perform tests of detail.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 3.2: Acquire Auditing 
Knowledge and Avoid Biases
Auditors acquire and apply certain types of information when performing audit data analytics 
(Knowledge):
•	 Client’s industry, governance, policies, and procedures.
•	 Relevant accounting and auditing standards, and SEC regulations.
•	 Risk assessment and statistical and sampling techniques.
Auditors can be biased when they make assumptions about what they expect to find during an 
audit engagement. They must be vigilantly skeptical of all information they are given (Risks).
Financial Accounting
There are a few typical motivations for financial accountants to perform data analyses:
•	Ensuring economic transactions, value changes, and period closing entries have been 
properly captured by the accounting system, valued in the appropriate account, and in 
the correct accounting period.
•	Predicting future net income and cash flows for top management.
•	Identifying, evaluating, and securing alternative capital sources.


--- PAGE 33 ---
3-32  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
ILLUSTRATION 3.34  Motivations, Objectives, and Questions for Financial Accounting Data Analytics
Motivation
Objective
Question
Ensure the financial statements 
reflect all transactions.
Verify transactions are not 
missing.
Does the sales transaction file 
agree to the financial statements?
Predict cashflows.
Determine expected cash 
inflow from sales.
Based on prior year sales and 
expected growth, what are 
predicted sales for the next year?
Evaluate alternative capital 
sources.
Decide whether to issue 
stock or bonds to raise 
capital.
What is the expected value of 
issuing more stock based on 
current market prices?
Managerial Accounting
Managerial accountants perform data analyses to improve management decision-making and 
operational performance.
Illustration 3.35 shows some typical motivations, objectives, and questions for the proj-
ects managerial accountants work on. 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 3.3: Consider Alternative 
Methods
If the objective of an analysis is to predict future income, then managerial accountants may 
use regression, trendlines, or a what-if analysis. Always choose the method that can answer the 
questions most effectively and efficiently (Alternatives).
ILLUSTRATION 3.35  Motivations, Objectives, and Questions for Managerial Accounting Data Analytics
Motivation
Objective
Question
Identify and evaluate new 
market, product, service, and 
business process opportunities.
Determine whether to expand 
an existing product line.
What are the projected sales 
for the new product line?
Efficiently allocate resources 
for successful operations.
Evaluate the best use of 
materials for production.
Which products use the most 
materials?
Maximize revenue generation 
and cash flows.
Determine the most profitable 
product mix.
How many units of each 
product should we produce to 
optimize contribution margin?
Increase organizational 
efficiency by managing costs.
Determine potential cost 
cutting.
Which production line has the 
highest amount of waste?
Illustration 3.34 shows examples of objectives for these motivations and possible questions 
to address them.


--- PAGE 34 ---
3.6  What are Data Analytics Motivations and Objectives in Professional Practice?  3-33
Tax Accounting
Tax accountants perform data analytics to enhance the quality of their professional advice and 
decisions, as well as to meet compliance requirements for their organization or clients. Typical 
motivations for tax analytics include:
•	Performing tax research.
•	Designing tax plans.
•	Correctly calculating tax liability and completing applicable tax returns.
Illustration 3.36 summarizes examples of the objectives related to these motivations and 
some specific questions.
ILLUSTRATION 3.36  Motivations, Objectives, and Questions for Tax Accounting Data Analytics
Motivation
Objective
Question
A new tax law has been passed 
that potentially changes a 
client’s tax liability.
Identify relevant tax law 
changes.
Based on last year’s tax return, 
how will the change in tax law 
affect the client’s tax liability?
A client requested tax 
planning for the next three 
years.
Prepare a tax plan to 
minimize tax liability.
Based on the client’s past tax 
returns and current business 
projections, how much tax will 
they owe next year?
Analyzing a client’s tax 
liability after preparing their 
tax return.
Identify unusual deductions.
How do the client’s deductions 
compare to their prior year 
return and to national averages?
Although general motivations in tax analytics may be similar, objectives and questions 
will be specific to individual clients. For example, tax planning is a common motivation, but 
a client may have differing objectives for their tax plan, such as saving for retirement or estate 
planning. The objective of the client will determine the type of analysis.
As this chapter has emphasized, accounting professionals are increasingly performing 
data analysis to provide value to their organizations and clients. Wherever your career takes 
you, thinking critically about what is motivating a project will help you ask the best objec-
tive-based data questions to achieve your goals. These are the first two steps of successful data 
analysis projects across professional practice areas.
Match at least one professional practice area’s acronym to the following motivations to perform data 
analyses.
	 a.	 Accounting information systems
	 b.	 Auditing
	 c.	 Financial Accounting
	 d.	 Managerial Accounting
	 e.	 Tax Accounting
Apply It 3.6
Match Motivations 
to Professional 
Practice Areas


--- PAGE 35 ---
3-34  CHAPTER 3  Motivations and Objectives for Data Analysis
Motivation
Practice Area
Performing tax research.
Investing in new technologies.
Performing analytical procedures on variances in account 
balances and on classes of transactions.
Ensuring all economic transactions have been recorded.
Investing in business intelligence tools.
Increasing security of AIS assets, including data.
Innovations in operational processes, either human or 
computer, to increase process effectiveness.
Designing defendable tax plans.
Learning if all adjusting entries at the end of the period have 
been recorded.
Improving system performance, such as processing time and 
availability.
Reviewing and evaluating the internal control system.
Increasing security of AIS assets, including data.
Computing tax liability and completing tax forms.
Performing physical inventory and fixed asset counts at the 
fiscal year end.
Testing documentation to determine if account balances are 
supported.
SOLUTION
Motivation
Practice Area
Performing tax research.
Tax accounting
Investing in new technologies.
AIS
Performing analytical procedures on variances in account 
balances and on classes of transactions.
Auditing
Ensuring all economic transactions have been recorded.
Financial accounting
Investing in business intelligence tools.
AIS
Increasing security of AIS assets, including data.
AIS
Innovations in operational processes, either human or 
computer, to increase process effectiveness.
Managerial accounting
Designing defendable tax plans.
Tax accounting
Learning if all adjusting entries at the end of the period have 
been recorded.
Financial accounting
Improving system performance, such as processing time and 
availability.
AIS
Reviewing and evaluating the internal control system.
Auditing
Increasing security of AIS assets, including data.
AIS
Computing tax liability and completing tax forms.
Tax accounting
Performing physical inventory and fixed asset counts at the 
fiscal year end.
Financial accounting
Testing documentation to determine if account balances are 
supported.
Auditing


--- PAGE 36 ---
Learning Objectives Review  3-35
Chapter Review and Practice
Learning Objectives Review
❶  Summarize the relationship between motivations, 
objectives, and data analysis questions.
Accountants generally perform data analyses for four reasons: 
•  Opportunities within their organizations and in the marketplace.
•  Professional issues and requirements from regulations and laws.
•  Solving problems within their organizations or for clients.
•  Process and performance evaluation of their own work, or work 
performed within their organizations.
First, identify the objective, which is the goal of the data analysis. Then, 
develop questions designed to achieve the project’s goal. Data analysis 
questions can be evaluated for clarity, conciseness, and measurability:
•  Will the answer address the objective of the analysis?
•  Does the question address a single topic? If not, break it down 
into sub-questions.
•  Is the question measurable?
•  Are the data needed to answer it available?
If the answer to any of these questions is no, then either revise the 
question or drop it.
The six elements of critical thinking can help us think about 
what is motivating data analyses and how to develop objectives and 
questions:
•  Understanding the stakeholders and their perspectives helps 
identify the project’s motivation and develop specific objectives 
and questions.
•  Critically thinking through the purpose of data analyses sup-
ports moving from objective to specific questions.
•  Considering several alternative methods of analyses increases 
the likelihood of selecting the best option for the purpose.
•  Being aware of potential risks makes it possible to mitigate them 
when evaluating motivation, determining objectives, and devel-
oping questions.
•  Considering what knowledge is necessary to successfully com-
plete the project involves either confirming we already have that 
knowledge or doing additional research.
•  Understanding why we are performing data analyses lets us 
leverage the experience to future data analytics contexts and 
tasks. Considering past experiences can speed up the process of 
identifying objectives and developing questions.
❷  Demonstrate how to develop descriptive questions.
Descriptive questions focus on understanding what is currently 
happening or what has happened in the past. They are developed 
by identifying the objective of the analysis and then formulating 
sub-questions that narrow the focus. The next step is identifying the 
data and the method of analysis to answer those questions. Common 
descriptive methods:
•  Frequency measures help understand categories of data.
•  Measures of location (mean, median, mode) reveal average obser-
vations in a data set.
•  Measures of dispersion (minimum, maximum, range, variance, 
and standard deviation) show how much variance there is among 
the observations in the data set.
•  Measures of percentage change show percentage increases and 
decreases as compared to prior periods and the percent of total.
❸  Demonstrate how to develop diagnostic questions.
Diagnostic questions build on what was learned in descriptive analy-
sis and explore the data to find the cause of the outcome. Diagnostic 
analytics determine why an outcome occurred by looking for anom-
alies, correlations, patterns, or trends. Common diagnostic analyses:
•  Anomaly detection: Scatterplots, bar charts.
•  Correlation (linear): Scatterplots, correlation.
•  Pattern detection: Line graphs, bar charts.
•  Trend analysis: Bar charts, line charts, trendlines.
❹  Demonstrate how to develop predictive questions.
Predictive analytics use past and present data to forecast and create mod-
els so businesses can make predictions about the future. The increased 
availability of data and software tools to perform predictive analytics 
means it is now used in all areas of accounting. To determine a predic-
tive question, ask, “What do I want to do with the answer?” Common 
analyses used to answer predictive questions:
•  Trendlines: Show the underlying functional relationships of 
the data. 
•  Regression analysis: Linear regression builds mathematical and 
statistical models to explain the relationship between a depen-
dent variable and one or more independent variables.
❺  Demonstrate how to develop prescriptive questions.
Prescriptive objectives build on predictions about the future and 
descriptions of the present to determine the best course of action. The 
objectives for prescriptive analytics focus on what should happen. 
The are two common methods of prescriptive analysis:
•  Optimization is the process of selecting values of variables that 
minimize or maximize some quantity of interest. Optimization 
modeling helps managers allocate resources more efficiently 
and make cost/profit decisions.


