EX 4.11  (LO 1-4)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting Prepare a Project Plan You 
are a financial analyst at Sihrya’s Beauty Salon. The company owner has asked you to perform data anal-
yses to understand the products that contribute to the salon’s retail store’s profitability. The owner pro-
vided you a data dictionary, presented here, describing data that you may consider using in your analysis.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Receipt Number
ReceiptNo
POS assigned receipt number uniquely 
identifying each sale.
Sales Date
SaleDate
Date of sale per the POS.
Inventory Code
InvCode
Unique inventory identification number 
for each product in the salon’s retail store.
Number Sold
NoSold
Quantity of items sold.
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Description of the inventory item.
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Gross sales price of the inventory item.
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Weighted average cost of the inventory 
item.
	 1.	 State the owner’s objective for your data analysis project.
	 2.	 Assume your analysis question is to identify the products that have the highest gross profit. Identify 
the data fields you should include in your analysis. Identify the data analysis choices to answer this 
analysis question.
	 3.	 Identify risks and the related control choices related to the analysis question.
EX 4.12  (LO 1-4)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Select a Data Strategy and Perform an Analy-
sis You are a managerial accountant working at a multi-location pet care retail company. Your supervisor 
has asked you to compare the dollar amount of purchases made from each vendor in December 2024 
compared to December 2025. After discussing with your supervisor, you have identified the following:
Objective: Compare total purchases by vendor in December 2024 and December 2025.
Question: In 2024 and 2025, from which vendors were the most purchases (in dollars) made? 
Data: You have access to the following data.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number.
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number.
VendorName
Vendor name.
VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional.
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name.
VendorCity
Mailing address city.
VendorState
Mailing address state.
VendorZip
Mailing address zip.
VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor.
PODate
Purchase order date.
POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number.
POItemDescription
Description of item.
ItemCost
Cost of the item per negotiated terms with vendor.
ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased.
	 1.	 Which data items would you use in your data strategy?
	 2.	 Design an analysis strategy to identify the vendor or vendors in which the company had a higher 
dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.
	 3.	 Perform the analysis per your analysis strategy. Identify the vendors in which the company had a 
higher dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.
--- PAGE 55 ---
4-54  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Problems
PR 4.1  (LO 1- 4)  Data   Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Complete Project Plan You work in 
the internal audit group in your organization, and your supervisor has asked you to analyze p-card data. 
The objective of the analysis is to understand p-card spending in the current year. The questions associ-
ated with the objective include:
•  With which three vendors does the company spend the most money using p-cards?
•  Which employee spends the highest dollar amount of money using the p-card?
Review the data and complete the chart to document your data and analysis strategy choices. 
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand p-card 
spending in the current year.
Questions:
•	 What are the three ven-
dors where the Company 
spends the most money 
using p-cards?
•	 Which employee spends 
the highest dollar amount 
of money using the p-card?
Data: Use the data provided in  
the Excel file.
Analysis: Use Excel to create a 
PivotTable that allows grouping of 
the p-card spending data by vendor 
and sort by the highest vendor.
Use Excel to create a PivotTable to 
group p-card spending amount by 
employee and sort by the highest 
dollar amount by employee.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis:
3. Data: 
4. Analysis:
	 5.	 Perform the analyses suggested in the chart. Summarize your results.
PR 4.2  (LO 1, 2, 3)  Data   Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Complete Steps 2 
and 3 of a Project Plan and Perform Analysis. You are a financial analyst at Sihrya’s Beauty Salon. 
The owner has asked you to perform data analyses to understand the products that contribute to the 
salon’s retail store’s profitability. The owner gave you a data dictionary, which is presented here, describ-
ing data that you may consider using in your analysis.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Receipt Number
ReceiptNo
POS assigned receipt number 
uniquely identifying each sale.
Sales Date
Saledate
Date of sale per the POS.
Inventory Code
InvCode
Unique inventory identification 
number for each product in the 
salon’s retail store.
Number Sold
NoSold
Quantity of items sold.
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Description of the inventory item.
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Gross sales price of the inventory 
item.
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Weighted average cost of the 
inventory item.
Assume your analysis objective is to identify the products that contribute the most to the salon’s retail 
store profitability. Your specific questions are: Which products have the highest units sold? Which prod-
ucts have a positive gross profit margin? Use the information provided to answer the following questions:
	 1.	 Identify the data fields to include in your data strategy.
	 2.	 Identify a data strategy that could be used to answer the objective questions.
	 3.	 Identify an analysis strategy that could be used to answer the objective questions.
	 4.	 Review the data provided to perform the analysis. After performing the analysis, identify the top two 
products that contribute to the salon’s profitability.
--- PAGE 56 ---
