Exercises
EX 4.1  (LO 1)  Match Project Plan Components Match the data analysis project plan component to 
each of the following statements:
	 a.	 Project objectives and questions
	 b.	 Data strategy
	 c.	 Analysis strategy
	 d.	 Critical risks
	 e.	 Embedded controls
	___ 1.  Verifying data values for reasonableness.
	___ 2.  Data formatting that must be transformed before analysis.
	___ 3.  Predicting next year’s sales volume.
	___ 4.  Sales volume data.
	___ 5.  Using regression analysis to predict next year’s sales volume.
	___ 6.  Diagnosing what is causing the cost overruns in the production process.
	___ 7.  Use of different scales on the y-axis and x-axis across visualizations.
EX 4.2  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Financial Accounting   Design a Data Strategy and an 
Analysis Strategy Assume your motivation for performing data analysis is to maximize sales revenues. 
Your specific objective questions are to determine whether sales volume is increasing, stable, or dropping 
for each of your company’s product lines this year compared to last year. Describe one possible data strat-
egy and analysis strategy for this objective.
EX 4.3  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   Match Data Strat-
egy Choices Match each objective to the following data selections.
	 a.	 Labor cost data
	 b.	 Production run data
	 c.	 Past marketing strategy data
	 d.	 IT service satisfaction survey data
	 e.	 Online market sales data
	 f.	 Sales contract data
	___ 1.  What is causing our large production materials usage variance?
	___ 2.  Which marketing strategy is most likely to increase our market share?
	___ 3.  Are we in compliance with U.S. GAAP procedures for revenue recognition?
	___ 4.  Which of our product lines could be sold online as well as in the store?
	___ 5.  Is the turnover in our IT staff impacting their service to the other functional areas?
	___ 6.  Are our payroll costs increasing?
--- PAGE 52 ---
Exercises  4-51
EX 4.4  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Design Data Strategies The following is a list of the avail-
able fields in a data set from a pet supply store.
Data Field
Description
	 1.	PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
	 2.	VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
	 3.	VendorName
Vendor name
	 4.	VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional
	 5.	VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
	 6.	VendorCity
Mailing address city
	 7.	VendorState
Mailing address state
	 8.	VendorZip
Mailing address zip
	 9.	VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor
	10.	PODate
Purchase order date
	11.	POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number
	12.	POItemDescription
Description of item
	13.	ItemCost
Cost of the inventory item per negotiated terms with vendor
	14.	ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased
For each of the following objectives (a, b, c), identify the minimum data fields (1-14) you would select for 
your data strategy:
	 a.	 Your objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases, so you want to identify which 
vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year.
	 b.	 Your objective is to determine which inventory items have the greatest cost increases over the past 
five years.
	 c.	 Your objective is to identify the five vendors from whom you made the highest value of purchases 
last year.
EX 4.5  (LO 2)  Prepare a Project Plan You graduate in one month from your undergraduate program. 
Your objective is to successfully apply to both professional jobs and graduate school. In your applica-
tion materials, you want to show how your grades improved as you moved from your general education 
courses to the courses in your major. Describe your data strategy, your analysis strategy, and three possi-
ble risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.6  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Data Strategy Risks and Controls Assume your data anal-
ysis objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases from vendors. Your analysis strategy is 
to identify which vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year. You have selected 
the following data fields for your data strategy.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
VendorName
Vendor name
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
VendorCity
Mailing address city
VendorState
Mailing address state
VendorZip
Mailing address zip
PODate
Purchase order date
Identify three data risks and data controls you could use for those risks.
--- PAGE 53 ---
4-52  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
EX 4.7  (LO 3)  Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are an internal 
auditor working with your company’s outdoor gear sales department to devise a new strategy for sales 
commissions that incentivizes higher profits than your current flat commission strategy. Describe a data 
strategy, an analysis strategy and three possible risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.8  (LO 3)  Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are a managerial accountant 
for Sihrya’s Beauty Supply Store. You have been asked to predict next year’s contribution margin. A sam-
ple of the available data for your analysis is included here.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Receipt Number
SaleReceiptNo
Sales Date
Saledate
Inventory Code
InvCode
Number Sold
NoSold
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Describe a data strategy, an analysis strategy, and three possible risks you need to control by providing 
control suggestions.
EX 4.9  (LO 3)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You work 
as a financial analyst for a large coffee shop chain, such as Starbucks. Your objective is to diagnose which 
stores have increasing sales. Your data strategy is to use the store sales monthly data from the past two 
years. Design an analysis strategy, including which risks you should consider and controls that would 
help mitigate those risks.
EX 4.10  (LO 1- 4)  Auditing   Accounting Information Systems   Prepare a Project Plan You are 
working in the accounting information systems group at your company. You have been asked to evaluate 
the internal controls associated with authentication of users into the information system. Your manager 
has asked you to perform a descriptive analysis of failed login attempts. Your manager has provided you 
with the analysis objective and question. Using the chart, document your data and analysis choices and 
risks and controls for each.
Objective and Questions
Data and  
Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Evaluate internal 
controls associated with 
authentication of users
Questions: What are the mean, 
median, standard deviation, 
and distribution of failed login 
attempts during the current year?
1. Data:
2. Analysis:
3. Data:
4. Analysis:
5. Data:
6. Analysis:
--- PAGE 54 ---
Exercises  4-53
