Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI) 4-55
 PR 4.3  (LO 1-4) Data
Managerial Accounting
Complete the Project Plan and Perform the 
Analysis As a financial analyst at a hospitality industry company, you have been asked to design a data 
analysis strategy to understand the factors that influence a guest’s quality rating. Your team adminis-
tered a survey of guests staying at your properties during the month of June. The database team has 
linked the survey responses for quality rating of the stay to the guest’s location, check-in and check-out 
date, and spending amounts. They indicated that they only included data related to surveys completed 
September 1 through September 10. 
  1.  Which data measurement scales are included in the data fields labeled Location, QualityRating, and 
SpendingAmount? 
  2.  Review the data set, identify data risks present in the data set, and suggest controls for these risks. 
  3.  Assume a member of your team suggested that you use the data to predict the quality rating of 
future stays. To do this predictive analysis, you would have to use the quality rating data in a predic-
tive analysis strategy. How would you respond to your team member about the appropriateness of 
using this type of analysis? 
  4.  Use this data set to design and perform a different, original data strategy and an analysis strategy to 
satisfy the objective question. Document your data strategy, analysis strategy, risks, and controls and 
present your analysis results. 
PR 4.4 (LO 1-4) Data
Tax Accounting
Complete the Project Plan and Perform the Analysis
Beautiful Bites is a chain of bakeries located in Colorado. Its owners are committed to social sustain-
ability values and want to focus their philanthropy in the municipalities where they are collecting the 
most sales tax. The objective of the data analysis is to determine where most of their customers live. The 
specific questions is: In which communities do most of our customers reside? 
1. Prepare the data analysis project plan.
2. Perform the analysis and summarize the results. 
 Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI)
 Automated Transportation, Inc. is a medium-sized manufacturer of remote-controlled cars, boats, and 
drones. The company was established five years ago when two brothers decided to build and sell remote 
control cars to enthusiasts. As the company grew, they expanded their product offerings to include 
remote control cars, boats, and drones. The brothers serve as the president and CEO of the company, and 
they now have over 70 employees. 
 They have two key customer groups, hobbyists and businesses interested in incorporating drones 
into their business process and supply chain. These two customer bases provide a variety of opportunities 
for growth.  Management values internal control, but since they are busy running the company they have 
employed accounting personnel to help design the company’s processes, policies, and internal controls:
•  The company is not required to have a report on internal controls and external auditors are not 
required to attest to the company’s internal controls. 
•  However, the owners want to be sure the company employees are designing and following policies 
that will help them maintain efficient and effective operations. 
•  The owners are also very data-driven and make many of their business decisions only after consid-
ering the data collected and analyzed. 
 The following is an excerpt from the data dictionary designed by the company’s information systems 
personnel and accounting information systems accountants.
 Data Field Label 
 Field Name in Database 
 Field Description 
 Invoice number 
 InvoiceNO 
 The invoice number, which is hand 
keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk from 
a manual invoice mailed to the company 
by the vendor. 
 Invoice amount 
 InvoiceAmt 
 The amount of the invoice, which is
hand-keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk 
from a manual invoice mailed to the 
company by the vendor. 
 Shipment date 
 ShipDate 
 The date the product was shipped from 
the shipping location. 
(Continued)
--- PAGE 57 ---
4-56  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Data Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Invoice date
InvoiceDate
The date of the invoice, which hand-
keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk from 
a manual invoice mailed to the company 
by the vendor.
Vendor identification 
number
VendorID
Unique vendor identification number.
Vendor name
VendorName
Name of the vendor.
Product purchased
ProductID
Product code for the product purchased 
from the vendor. This product code is 
consistent with the catalog from the vendor.
Unit cost
UnitCost
The cost per unit of the product 
purchased from the vendor.
Shipping cost
ShipCost
Total shipping costs.
Flat duty
FlatDuty
The flat duty rate applies to article that 
are dutiable.
Tariff
TariffAmt
The total dollar amount of a tariff 
applied to the goods shipped.
Shipping location
ShipLocation
The country in which the goods are 
shipped from.
Receiving Quality 
rating
QualityRate
This is a quality rating keyed into the 
AIS by the receiving team when they 
receive the goods. The scale is 1 = poor 
to 5 = excellent quality. The receiving 
team rates the shipment on packaging, 
quality of materials, and overall delivery.
Payment terms
PaymentTerms
The agreed-upon payment terms with 
the vendor. These terms are negotiated 
by the purchasing manager and keyed 
into the vendor master file by the 
purchasing supervisor.
Shipping terms
ShipTerms
Shipping terms–typically FOB 
destination or FOB shipping.
Payment address
PayAddress
The vendors address where payment is 
to be mailed.
Purchase order 
number
PONumber
The unique identifying number assigned 
to each purchase order issued by the 
company.
Purchase order date
PODate
The date the purchase order is issued by 
the company.
Receiving report 
number
ReceivingNumber
The unique identifying number assigned 
to each receiving report created by the 
company’s receiving group.
Receiving report date
ReceivingDate
The date the product is received by the 
company’s receiving department.
Quantity received
QtyReceived
The total quantity of items received.
Quantity purchased
QtyPurchased
The total quantity of items on the 
Purchase Order.
Invoiced quantity
QtyInvoice
The total quantity of items on the invoice, 
this amount is hand keyed into the AIS 
by the AP clerk from the manual invoice 
mailed to the company by the vendor.
Treasurer Approval
Approved
The initials of the Treasurer indicating 
their approval if the invoice was greater 
than $10,000.
--- PAGE 58 ---
Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI)  4-57
PAC 4.1  Accounting Information Systems: Evaluate AIS Internal Controls 
Accounting Information Systems   As an information systems accountant, the owners have asked 
to you to design internal controls related to the company’s vendor payment system. Remember from 
your accounting information systems course that there are several important controls in the order-to-
pay cycle, including approval of purchases, and approval of vendor invoices. You have implemented the 
following control:
•	 The accounting clerk prepares a voucher package containing a disbursement voucher, vendor 
invoice, purchase order, and receiving document for each payment to be made.
•	 Invoices where payment exceeds $10,000 have a second level of approval, which is noted in the 
information system by the treasurer’s initials.
You want to test the operational effectiveness of this control by analyzing data captured by the accounting 
information system during this process. Assume the objective of your analysis is to understand whether 
the internal control is operating as designed. Design your data analysis strategy to address this objective. 
Be sure to document the following components:
	 1.	 What is the question your data analysis should address?
	 2.	 Using the data dictionary, what measured raw data and non-measured raw data fields should you 
request?
	 3.	 What analysis choices will you make to analyze the data? Specifically, what calculated data fields 
would you create in your analysis?
	 4.	 What are the data risks to your data analysis strategy?
	 5.	 What are the analysis risks in your strategy?
	 6.	 What controls should you include in your data and analysis strategies to minimize the risks you outlined?
PAC 4.2  Auditing: Select Large and Unusual Purchases
Data   Auditing   You are a ­second-year staff working at a public accounting firm assigned to the ATI 
engagement, which is a new engagement for the firm. Your audit senior has provided you with a trans-
action file that contains all the company’s payments to vendors for the month of January. You have been 
asked to determine if the company is accurately recording invoice information by designing a data analy-
sis strategy to select purchase transactions for further testing. You must design a data analysis strategy to 
select purchase transactions for further testing. Your senior asked you to identify transactions that may be 
outside the normal purchasing behavior. Therefore, you must perform descriptive analyses. Your senior 
provided you with this partial data ­analysis plan.
Complete the chart by identifying the risk and related controls for the data and analysis choices 
determined in the data analysis plan.
Objective and 
Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Identify  
purchase transactions  
for further testing.
Questions: Are  
there purchase  
transactions that  
may be considered  
anomalies?
Data strategy: InvoiceNo, 
InvoiceDate, QtyInvoice, 
InvoiceAmt, VendorID, 
VendorDescription
Analysis strategy: Perform 
descriptive statistics to understand 
total dollar amount and count of 
purchases made to each vendor.
Perform diagnostic statistics and 
create a scatterplot whereby the 
InvoiceDate is on the X-axis and 
the InvoiceAmount is on the Y-axis 
to identify any outlier purchases.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis: 
3. Data: 
4. Analysis: 
	 5.	 Perform descriptive statistical analysis to identify the total dollar amount and count of purchases 
made to each vendor.
	 6.	 Use the provided data set to perform the diagnostic statistical analysis to create a scatterplot where 
the InvoiceDate is on the X-axis and the InvoiceAmt is on the Y-axis to identify outlier purchases.
--- PAGE 59 ---
4-58  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
PAC 4.3  Financial Accounting: Plan to Identify High Activity Vendors
Financial Accounting   The owners of the company want to know which vendors the purchasing 
group are using and how much they are paying each to negotiate better contract terms with regular 
vendors. You are performing data analysis to identify the most used vendors. Answer each question with 
respect to your data analysis.
	 1.	 What is the question your data analysis should address?
	 2.	 Using the data dictionary, what measured raw data and non-measured raw data fields should you 
request?
	 3.	 What analysis choices will you make to analyze the data? Be specific, what calculated data fields 
would you create in your analysis?
	 4.	 What are the data risks to your data analysis strategy?
	 5.	 What are the analysis risks in your strategy?
	 6.	 What controls should you include in your analysis to minimize the risks you outlined?
PAC 4.4  Managerial Accounting: Rank Vendor Quality
Data   Managerial Accounting   Because the company is growing so fast, the owners want to be sure 
that they are partnering with the right vendors for raw materials. They have asked the receiving team 
to give each receipt a rating to document the quality of the packaging, the materials in appearance, and 
overall delivery. For each receipt the receiving group documents a quality rating in the accounting infor-
mation system. The owners have asked you to determine how the quality rating by vendor has changed 
since the beginning of the year. Your manager has designed the following partial data analysis strategy. 
Complete the chart and document the risks and related controls to your analyses.
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand the 
quality ratings of purchases.
Questions: What is the  
average quality rating by  
vendor?
What is the highest and  
lowest quality rating by  
vendor?
How has the quality rating by 
vendor changed over time?
Data strategy: VendorID, 
VendorName, ReceivingNo, 
ReceivingDate, QualityRate
Analysis strategy:
Calculate the average QualityRating 
by VendorName.
Calculate the minimum and 
maximum QualityRating by 
VendorName.
Visualize how QualityRating by 
VendorName has changed over time.
1. Data:
2. Analysis: 
3. Data:
4. Analysis: 
	 5.	 Perform the analyses suggested in the data analyses project plan.
PAC 4.5  Tax Accounting: Plan International Duty Cost Analysis
Tax Accounting   The owners want to understand the total dollar amount of customs duty they will owe 
the U.S. government for the year. They have asked you to perform descriptive analytics to understand the 
purchases from vendors located in each country. Your company makes purchases from vendors located in 
several countries, such as China, Mexico, the United States, Japan, South Africa, Israel, Greece, and Egypt. 
You and your team have designed a data analysis strategy. You have been asked to consider the risks 
and related controls in the development of that strategy. Complete the following chart.
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand the 
purchases made from each 
country.
Questions: What dollar amount 
of purchases are made from each 
country?
How many purchases were made 
from vendors in each country?
Data strategy: ShipLocation, 
InvoiceAmt, FlatDuty, TariffAmt, 
PONumber
Analysis strategy: 
Use a pivot table to drop the 
ShipLocation into the rows and the 
sum of InvoiceAmt into values.
Use a pivot table to drop the  
ShipLocation into the rows and  
count of PONumber into values.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis: 
3. Data: 
4. Analysis: 
--- PAGE 60 ---
Le Grind Continuing Case: Design a Data Analysis Plan for Describing and Diagnosing Gross Margin Changes
4-59
Le Grind Continuing Case: Design a Data Analysis Plan for Describing and Diagnosing Gross
Margin Changes
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more details about the continuing case. 
