--- PAGE 1 ---
4-0
 C H A PT E R  4 
 Planning Data and 
Analysis Strategies 
 Chapter Preview 
 Armed with an understanding of the motivations and objectives for the data analysis project 
and after formulating the necessary objective questions, it is time for the final step in the plan-
ning stage–designing the data and analysis strategies. You will soon be expected to apply your 
knowledge, common sense, and problem-solving skills to design a variety of accounting, audit, 
and tax related data and analyses strategies. This chapter will help you develop the skills neces-
sary to create effective data analysis project plans.
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1. Prepare data
2. Build information
     models
    
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1
 Professional Insight: Why Should You Plan Data and Analysis 
Strategies? 
 Taylor was excited to begin her career in auditing after interning at a Big Four accounting firm 
during the last busy season. 
 My audit team had me design my own data and analysis strategies and document each 
step I performed. While I lacked confidence at first, I felt very supported. I learned so 
much, even when I made mistakes and had to pivot my strategies. 
I was more successful when I understood the motivation for and the objective 
of my tasks. I was able to formulate better questions, which resulted in better 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter Roadmap  4-1
data choices. The measurement scales of my selected data also pointed me 
toward the appropriate analyses.
My first task was a descriptive analysis. I had to determine if the year-end accounts 
receivable subsidiary ledger and general ledger balances reconciled. After checking 
if any credit customer’s activities were excluded from the general ledger accounts 
receivable balance, I created an accounts receivable aging report listing each credit 
customer’s outstanding balances from the subsidiary ledger. I compared the aging 
reports’ items to the general ledger accounts receivable postings and noted each 
unmatched item. If there were no unmatched items, the accounts receivable balance 
in the general ledger was successfully reconciled and verified.
I then designed a diagnostic analysis strategy to determine which receivable activities 
were causing any unmatched items I had found. My strategy began with gathering the 
client’s accounts receivable process documentation. For each unmatched item, I iden-
tified which process caused the items to be included in both ledgers. Documenting my 
work helped me explain what, how, and why I performed each step. This record will be 
helpful when we repeat this verification in next year’s audit. Designing my own data 
and analysis strategies helped me gain relevant skills and the confidence to start 
my auditing career.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 4.1   Identify the components of 
a data analysis project plan.
•	 Create a Data Analysis Project 
Plan
•	 Sample Data Analysis Project 
Plan
Build a Project Plan for Inventory 
Costs
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.2   Describe how to develop a 
data strategy.
•	 Identify Appropriate Data
•	 Evaluate Data Fields and Sources
•	 Consider Data Strategy Risks and 
Implement Controls
Identify Data Characteristics 
(Example: Accounting Information 
Systems)
 LO 4.3   Explain how an analysis 
strategy is designed.
•	 Designing Analyses to Describe 
and Diagnose
•	 Designing Analyses to Predict and 
Prescribe
Create a Predictive Data Analysis 
Project Plan
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.4   Summarize data and 
analyses strategies in professional 
practice areas.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing 
•	 Financial Accounting 
•	 Managerial Accounting 
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Strategies with 
Professional Practice Areas
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are 
­available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
4-2  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data 
Analysis Projects?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Identify the components of a data analysis project plan.
Recall that the first step in planning a data analysis project is understanding the motivations 
for the project, such as identifying problems, evaluating patterns and opportunities, measuring 
performance, and regulatory compliance. Considering the perspectives of the project’s primary 
stakeholders is an important part of that understanding. Next, thinking critically about a proj-
ect’s purpose helps define the objective and articulate the project’s specific questions. ­Common 
objectives and questions can be grouped by whether the analysis results describe, diagnose, or 
predict an outcome, or if the analysis results should prescribe future organizational strategy.
The final step of the data analysis planning stage is designing a professional plan for the 
data analysis project. Critical thinking continues to play a vital role, from selecting a strategy 
for the data and the analysis, to identifying inherent risks to both and embedding internal con-
trols to reduce them. A data and analysis strategy plan is an organized and deliberate blueprint 
for the project. It also allows someone other than its creator to perform the analysis, which 
can free accountants to perform other valuable services with their business and regulatory 
expertise.
Create a Data Analysis Project Plan
Many of us use planning tools every day, such as relying on navigation applications to plan 
travel time and how to get to new destinations. Planning tools make tasks more efficient and 
the results more effective. They also often provide logical explanations for the necessity of 
certain steps or why they should be performed in a particular order.
This chapter summarizes a tool for data analysis project planning that provides similar 
benefits for accountants (Illustration 4.1). The order of the components is intentional: 
Step 1 
Focus on the objective: 
•	Keep the project’s objective and specific questions in mind to select the best data and 
analysis strategies to fulfill the objective and answer those questions. Simply remember-
ing to ask how the plan’s proposed data and analysis strategy decisions relate to the objec-
tive helps us make better choices. 
Step 2 
Select a data strategy: 
•	Use critical thinking to develop and rank a few data alternatives. This ensures that we 
choose the data option most appropriate for the objective.
Step 3 
Select an analysis strategy: 
•	Use what was learned from selecting the data strategy and apply that same development 
and ranking process to analyses alternatives. Following this step increases the likelihood 
of selecting the best analysis option.
Step 4 
Consider risks: 
•	Considering and prioritizing critical risks to both the data and the analysis strategies 
reveals how these risks can create misleading and invalid results.
--- PAGE 4 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-3
ILLUSTRATION 4.1  A Data Analysis Project Plan
3
4
5
Stay focused on the project’s objective and specific questions.
Project Objective
1
Develop data alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Develop analysis alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Analysis Strategy
Identify risks to both the data strategy and analysis strategy.
Consider Risks
Implement controls to reduce risks within the data and analysis strategies.
Embed Controls
2 Data Strategy
Step 5 
Embed controls: 
•	Designing and implementing preventative and detective controls into the analysis process 
leads to results that are accurate, valid, and reliable.
A data analysis plan increases the likelihood that analysis results accurately describe what 
happened, diagnose why it happened, predict what is likely to happen, or prescribe the best 
course forward. When the project plan is complete, so is the data analysis process planning 
stage, and it is time to move to the analysis stage. The next chapter describes how to properly 
prepare data for analysis. But first, practice using this project planning tool in an accounting 
context.
Sample Data Analysis Project Plan
Imagine you are a financial accountant for WeMakeIt, Inc., which is an employee-owned 3D 
printing corporation in Phoenix, Arizona. They sell superhero figurines, mechanical shop 
tools, and medical prostheses that are manufactured with 3D printing technologies. Founded 
five years ago by a local college student, Marisabel Cordoba, WeMakeIt, Inc. grew quickly to 
fill their production capacities and has maintained a stable size for the last three years.
Step 1: Focus on the Objective
The project in this example is to estimate the bad debts in the 2025 year-end accounts receiv-
able balance. The result will be the value estimate for the 2025 year-end adjusting journal 
entry that debits bad debts expense and credits the allowance for uncollectible accounts 
contra-asset. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
4-4  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.1: Estimate Bad Debts
The U.S. GAAP ending accounts receivable method requires the following:
•	 The year-end accounts receivable balance can be considered in total or in age group subtotals. 
Age grouping rules for manufacturing companies are typically less than 30 days, 30 to 60 days, 
and greater than 60 days outstanding, but these vary by industry.
•	 Reviewing regulatory guidance, industry practices, business policies and processes, and past 
bad debt estimation percentages is the professional approach for selecting bad debt estima-
tion percentages. Typically, as the age of the accounts receivable increases, the percentage 
uncollectible applied to that age also increases (Knowledge).
Assume the following for this example:
•	The company offers its credit customers payment terms of 30 days.
•	The 2025 year-end accounts receivable balance in the general ledger is $83,734.30.
•	The 2025 year-end unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts has a credit balance 
of $3,000.
•	WeMakeIt, Inc. decided to use the percentage of year-end accounts receivable method to 
estimate bad debts expense each year. They have authorized a 2% bad debts assumption 
for invoices that are 30 to 60 days outstanding and 30% for invoices that are outstanding 
for more than 60 days.
This data analysis project has the following objective and related questions:
•	Objective: Accurately estimate bad debts within the year-end accounts receivable bal-
ance in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
•	Specific questions: 
	 1.  What is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receivables in the 2025 year-end 
outstanding accounts receivables? 
	 2.  What amount should be used in the adjusting journal entry for bad debts expense?
With the objective defined and the questions articulated, it is time to develop the data strategy.
Step 2: Select the Data Strategy
Develop several data alternatives that could help answer the objective question. Then, to select 
the most useful data alternative for the project plan, identify the factors you want to use to 
rank these alternatives, and assign values to each alternative’s factors. The best data strategy 
alternative is the one with the highest overall factor ratings.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.2: Consider Different 
Perspectives
The net realizable value of accounts receivable (accounts receivable minus the allowance for 
uncollectible accounts) is reported on the balance sheet as a current asset. The bad debts 
expense reduces net income reported on the income statement. Keep in mind that parties with 
very different perspectives use this information for decision-making (Stakeholders):
•	 Creditors, who want to be repaid, are interested in the liquidity of the assets.
•	 Shareholders, who predict future stock values as well as dividend expectations, must under-
stand the expected future cash inflows from operations.
•	 Managers want to earn bonuses that are determined by growth in net income and total assets. 
The change in the allowance for uncollectible accounts will influence both amounts.
--- PAGE 6 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-5
There are a few data strategy alternatives that could be considered either individually or in 
combination for this project:
•	All credit sales invoices and collections data that pertain to the accounting period.
•	All outstanding invoices included in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	The prior year-end’s adjusted account balance and the current year-end’s unadjusted 
account balance in the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
•	Current year’s total accounts receivable write-offs.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for accounts receivable age categories.
Recall that the objective question for this analysis project asks for a reasonable estimate of 
the year-end uncollectible accounts receivables. Because WeMakeIt, Inc. uses the GAAP per-
centage of ending accounts receivables method with the three age categories typical for man-
ufacturing companies, the data that would be most useful considering the objectives would 
include:
•	The outstanding invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	This year’s unadjusted allowance for uncollectible account balance.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for each accounts receivable age group.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.3: Choose the Data Strategy 
that Fits Your Objective
Both data and analysis strategies are improved when they are developed, evaluated, and ranked 
by the factor values placed on each potential data strategy: 
•	 Factors that value data relevance, such as expected future collections, prior estimation 
­errors, and expected risk of uncollectibility should be used to select the best data strategy for 
­WeMakeIt, Inc’s analysis plan (Alternatives). 
•	 Using the data from outstanding invoices, the unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts 
receivable, and authorized bad debt estimation percentages was the best choice for WeMakeIt, 
Inc’s analysis. These data choices best match the objective of the analysis, which is to calculate 
a reasonable estimate for the year-end uncollectible accounts ­receivable (Purpose).
•	 For a personal example, if your objective was to dress successfully for an interview, then you 
could develop, evaluate, and rank the alternatives of wearing something you already own, 
borrowing from a friend, or buying something new to wear to the interview. Using clothes you 
already own would rank higher than buying new clothes if you were ranking ­options based on 
lowest costs and time factors. 
Step 3: Select the Analysis Strategy
For any project plan, choosing the best analysis strategy involves considering and evaluating 
several possible alternative analyses given the objective questions and the already selected 
strategy for the data. The analysis alternatives in this bad debt estimation example involve 
different methods for determining the age of an outstanding invoice:
•	Days outstanding from the invoice date forward.
•	Days outstanding from the due date forward.
The first analysis alternative is preferable because WeMakeIt, Inc.’s policy is to allow custom-
ers 30 days to pay their invoices and because they estimate bad debts only when an invoice is 
past its due date, which is equal to or more than 30 days outstanding.
Therefore, the first question, what is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receiv-
ables in the 2025 year-end outstanding accounts receivables, will be answered by summing 
--- PAGE 7 ---
4-6  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
each age group’s estimated bad debts value. This is a measure estimating the uncollectible 
portion of the year-end accounts receivable balance (­Illustration 4.2). ( Data See How To 
4.1 at the end of the chapter to learn how to calculate the figures in this illustration.)
ILLUSTRATION 4.2  WeMakeIt, Inc.: Estimated Value of Uncollectible Receivables
Total accounts receivable value
x % uncollectible
$ Estimated as uncollectible
Total
$ 30,099.29
0%
$                  0
< 30 days
$ 20,441.46
2%
$       408.83
30–60 days
$ 33,193.55
30%
$   9,958.07
$ 83,734.30
$ 10,366.89
> 60 days
The second question, what value should be used in the adjusting journal entry at year-end 
for bad debts expense, will be answered when this total of $ 10,366.89 is reduced by the unad-
justed year-end allowance for uncollectible accounts balance ($ 3,000). The resulting calcu-
lated value is the year-end adjusting journal entry debiting bad debt expense and crediting 
allowance for uncollectible accounts:
Debit
Credit
Bad debts expense
$ 7,366.89
    Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$ 7,366.89
Increasing the allowance account’s $3,000 unadjusted balance by $ 7,366.89 will result in an 
adjusted balance of $ 10,366.89, equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts in accounts 
receivable at the 2025 year end. Illustration 4.3 summarizes the first three steps of this 
­project’s plan.
ILLUSTRATION 4.3  In-Progress Project Plan for Estimating Year-End Bad Debts: Steps 1-3
3
4
5
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
Data Strategy Risks
Data Strategy Controls
2 Data Strategy
1. Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
2. Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
3. Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 days, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30-60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
     for the adjusting entry value.
This total answers
the first project
plan question
This result answers
the second project
plan question
This project plan is
incomplete. The steps
for evaluating risks
and embedding
controls are
covered next. 
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
How To
--- PAGE 8 ---
4.1 How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects? 4-7
 The last two steps are considering risks and controls for both the data strategy and the analy-
sis strategy. First we will evaluate the data strategy’s risks and controls, and then the analysis 
strategy risks and controls. 
Steps 4 and 5: Data Strategy Risks and Controls
 While organizations invest in processes and controls designed to capture accounting data 
correctly, accounting databases inevitably have some data issues.  In this example, the data 
include the 2025 year-end accounts receivable outstanding invoices and the authorized bad 
debt estimation percentages. There could be some risks to using this accounts receivable data:
•  Missing or incorrectly included invoices in the general or the subsidiary ledger. 
•  Errors in the invoice due date fields or the invoice total amounts. 
•  Errors created when the data are exported from the AIS system into the analysis tool. 
 APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.4: Threats to Data Strategy 
 Data risks can impact the accuracy and validity of analysis results. These risks must be evalu-
ated so appropriate controls can be added to the project plan.  Data strategy risks can include 
( Risks ):
•  Dirty data such as incomplete data, inaccurate data, and incorrectly formatted data fields. 
•  Data irrelevant to the objective of the project. 
•  Insuff icient data for the analysis to be reliable. 
•  Data that is an unrepresentative sample of the underlying population. 
•  Errors in management estimates and assumptions about the data. 
 These data risks can be controlled by comparing the extracted data to the source invoice and 
collection documents. Possible risks involving the management’s estimates of bad debt per-
centages include human bias embedded in the authorized bad debt percentages, changes in 
customer payment behavior, and business process changes to credit customer approvals and 
collection practices.
Company Accountant
External Auditor
These invoices are
99% collectible!
Only 86% of these
seem collectible...
 One way to control for these risks is to ask the finance, sales, and accounts receivable man-
agers if there were changes to the customer base, market conditions, or business policies and 
procedures for credit approval, write-offs, or collection policies during the year. This knowl-
edge could confirm existing bad debt percentages or motivate their adjustment. 
 Another control for evaluating the risks in management estimates and assumptions is 
to compare current data to prior year data. Evaluating increases in the median number of 
days outstanding and the number of new to returning customers in each age group can offer 
insights into the reasonableness of bad debt estimation percentages. 
 To illustrate, imagine you were wondering if the 30% bad debt percentage for invoices 
greater than 60 days outstanding was a reasonable management assumption in 2025. 
--- PAGE 9 ---
4-8  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.4 demonstrates that the median number of days outstanding in the greater 
than 60 days outstanding group increased in 2025.
ILLUSTRATION 4.4  Data Risk 
in Bad Debt Percentages: Median 
Days Outstanding
Aging Categories
30–60 days
45
61
> 60 days
2024 and 2025 Past-Due Accounts Receivable
Median Days Outstanding per Age Group
0
20
40
60
80
100
2024
2025
95
95
55
Additionally, you might wonder if this increase was caused by new customers, as the pay-
ment habits of new customers are more uncertain than those of continuing customers. 
Illustration 4.5 shows that the > 60 days age group has many outstanding invoices from 
new customers.
ILLUSTRATION 4.5  Data Risk in 
Bad Debt Percentages: Risks from 
New Customers
30–60 days
> 60 days
Comparing Past-Due Invoices for New Customers
vs. Returning Customers by Age Group
$0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
Returning Customer
New Customer
The results of these control tests indicate that if the 2024 bad debt percentage for this age 
group was used in 2025, it may not accurately measure the bad debts expected in the 2025 
accounts receivable balance. These visualizations show that implementing controls, such as 
data reasonableness tests, before performing an analysis can result in better business and pro-
fessional intelligence.
Steps 4 and 5: Analysis Strategy Risks and Controls
Common analysis risks include errors in data manipulation, calculation, or using technology, 
as well as human biases and ethical violations when using sensitive data. Here are some exam-
ples of analyses risks when estimating bad debts: 
•	Errors in age group categorization and age total calculations.
•	Incorrect application of bad debt estimation percentages to age group totals.
•	Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts across age groups.
•	Mistakes in the calculation of the value to use for bad debts expense.
Verifying the accuracy of the age group categorizations and each sum and multiplication per-
formed on age group data items and totals would control for these risks.
Another control is to use common sense when reviewing the results for reasonableness. 
Illustration 4.6 uses an example from the 30–60 days age group estimation to show how a 
common sense check helps catch large errors. The total outstanding accounts receivable for 
that age group was $ 20,441.46, and the uncollectible percentage for that group was 2%. The 
--- PAGE 10 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-9
estimated uncollectible value for that age group was calculated as the product of those two 
numbers, resulting in $ 408.83. This control has verified our calculation.
ILLUSTRATION 4.6  Common 
Sense Check for the 30–60 Days 
Group Results
Common Sense
Step 1
2% is 1/5th of 10%
10% is easy to
calculate!
Now, just divide this
by 5 to get the 2% amount.
Results for this age group
were $408.83. We can be
confident in our result.
Common Sense
Step 2
10% of $20,441 = $2,044
Common Sense
Step 3
$2,044 divided by 5 = $409 
Analysis results that significantly vary from common sense checks should be verified.
The project plan design for this example is now complete (Illustration 4.7).
ILLUSTRATION 4.7  Complete Project Plan for Estimating Bad Debts
3
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
2 Data Strategy
The following data should be used in the analysis:
• Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
• Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
• Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 day, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30–60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from allowance for uncollectible accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
      for the adjusting entry value.
4
• Errors in age group categorization and
   calculations.
 • Erroneous application of bad debt estimation
   percentages to age group totals.
 • Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts
   across age groups.
 • Errors in the calculation of the value to use for
   bad debts expense.
Data Strategy Risks
• Data errors (missing data, due date errors, invoice
   total errors).
• Data extraction errors.
• Inaccurate management assumptions and
   estimates (bad debt percentages).
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
• Verify all classifications and groupings.
 • Verify all calculations.
 • Verify correct use of analysis technologies.
 
Data Strategy Controls
• Compare extracted data to source documentation.
• Compare to prior period to verify management
   estimates and assumptions.
• Review customer, policy and procedure changes.
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
This total
answers the first
project plan question
This result
answers the second
project plan question
--- PAGE 11 ---
4-10  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Next, we go into more depth about how to develop both data and analysis strategies.
Apply It 4.1
Build a Project Plan 
for Inventory Costs
Financial Accounting   Founded by Elisabeth Hess and based in Wisconsin, Tremendous Toys 
produces and sells unique ­animal-form toys online. The company has over a million dollars in sales 
revenues and a strong national and international following. The investment bank underwriting its 
upcoming initial public offering requires that Elisabeth produce a U.S. GAAP valuation of year-end 
inventory.
Elisabeth has kept meticulous records, organized in business cost categories, which are listed 
here. She knows which materials were used to create each toy, which employee built it, and how 
long each took to create. She has also recorded the number and type of toys produced every month. 
­However, she has never assigned costs to her inventory items.
Materials
Labor
Overhead
Plastic for 3D 
printers
Production workers’ time
3D printer costs
Wood
Production workers’ pay rate
Production tools costs
Resin
Computer (peripherals and internet) 
costs
Fiber and fabric
Shipping costs
Paints, varnishes, 
and dyes
Factory rent, utilities, and storage
Toy clothing
Production supplies
Glues and epoxies
Tax and legal fees
Bling and other 
accessories
Donations to charities
Eyes and body parts
Advertising costs
Prepare a data analysis project plan to help Elisabeth develop her inventoriable costs. Use the follow-
ing structure for your answer.
	 1.	Project objective and specific question
	 2.	Data strategy
	 3.	Analysis strategy
	 4.	Data and analysis strategy risks
	 5.	Data and analysis strategy controls
SOLUTION
	 1.	Project objective
	
	 Specific question
Prepare a U.S. GAAP compliant full costing valuation for 
Tremendous Toys’ current inventory.
What is the U.S. GAAP year-end value of inventory?
	 2.	Data strategy
•	 Collect all costs and raw measures of consumption of 
resources related to production (direct materials, direct 
labor, and manufacturing overhead costs) for the last 
three years.
•	 Collect records of how many units were produced for each 
month of cost data received.
•	 Take a physical count of the current inventory by product.
(Continued)
--- PAGE 12 ---
4.2  What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis?  4-11
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 Aggregate cost data by monthly production of figurines.
•	 Estimate cost behavior using regression to find variable 
costs per figurine and total fixed production costs per 
month.
•	 Apply results to year-end inventory.
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 Missing data.
•	 Including personal expenses.
•	 Material costs and worker costs may not be representa-
tive of true replacement costs of future material and labor 
costs.
•	 Potential bias for minimizing cost information to make 
business seem more profitable.
•	 Averaging costs across figurines may not be accurate if 
true costs of different figurines vary significantly.
•	 Regression may not have strong explanatory power 
(R-square).
•	 Costs may have seasonality differences (due to scarcity of 
materials or heating and cooling costs).
•	 Cost formula may need to be recalculated annually to cap-
ture cost changes.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Interview Elisabeth with a typical list of inventory costs to 
catch omitted costs.
•	 Inquire about the seasonal or economic trends of mate-
rials, labor and production overhead costs, and use the 
average of the highest and lowest points.
•	 Use median tendencies rather than means.
•	 Run sensitivity models with future replacement cost val-
ues to note potential risk in final product cost estimations 
and possible data bias.
4.2  What Should We Consider When 
Selecting Data for Analysis?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ❷
Describe how to develop a data strategy.
It’s easier to make better decisions when we have the necessary information. Each semester, 
students who know their educational and career goals can select the courses that will prepare 
them to graduate and begin their careers. For example, accounting majors do not need to take 
the same courses as education majors. The same idea applies when developing a strategy for 
selecting data in data analysis. A successful data analysis project hinges on selecting data that 
are relevant and appropriate for the objective of the project, respecting the data’s characteris-
tics and measurement scales, and controlling for inherent data risks.
--- PAGE 13 ---
4-12  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Identify Appropriate Data
Data can be considered appropriate for analysis when they are relevant, available, and the 
characteristics match the analysis method requirements. Appropriate data can be internal, 
external, or a combination of both:
•	Internal data are generated within the organization, such as sales data, purchase data, 
inventory data, customer data, and vendor data. Internal data can typically be more easily 
controlled and verified by an organization.
•	External data are obtained from sources outside of an organization. This data can include 
weather data, geographic data, and publicly available competitor data. External data are 
somewhat riskier to use since we often cannot know if the data are accurate or complete. 
External data can, however, provide insights that internal data alone cannot provide.
After identifying the available and relevant data alternatives, the characteristics of the possible 
data sets need to be verified as suitable for the planned analysis.
Evaluate Data Fields and Sources
A data set is a collection of data columns and rows available for analysis. Understanding the 
characteristics of a data set is important because, for example, statistical measures and tests 
often require certain data characteristics or a minimum of data points. Violating the data 
requirements for these measures and tests can threaten the accuracy, reliability, and signifi-
cance of the analysis results.
Let’s use an example to evaluate the impact data can have on analysis. Illustration 4.8 
shows the inventory data set for the 3D manufacturing company WeMakeIt, Inc.
ILLUSTRATION 4.8  Typical Elements in a Data Set from WeMakeIt, Inc.’s Inventory
358500
358600
358900
359000
361100
361200
361300
361400
3
3
3
3
$  36.00
$  36.00
$  36.00
$  36.00
30
35
25
30
Medical model foot
Medical model hand
Shop Lamp globe
Superhero Fantastic Four Mister Fantastic
Superhero Fantastic Four Invisible Woman
Superhero Fantastic Four Thing
Superhero Fantastic Four Human Touch
Cord wraps
InventoryCode InventoryDescription
1
1
2
2
$  30.40
$  30.20
$  20.05
$    5.00
ProductCategory UnitCost
32
16
43
80
NumberOnHand
The data set is the entire collection
of rows and columns.
Row = Record
Column = Data field = Attribute
The individual columns in a data set are called fields, and if the source of the data was a data-
base, the columns are called attributes. Each column describes and represents one unique 
characteristic, a description, or aspect of the phenomena captured in the data set. Rows in 
a data set from a database are records, which represent the collection of columns that hold 
the descriptions of a single occurrence of the data set’s purpose. In Illustration 4.8, the high-
lighted row ­contains all the information about the inventory item Superhero Fantastic Four 
Mister Fantastic–inventory code, the description, product category, unit cost, and the number 
of items on hand. This inventory item belongs to the ProductCategory group #3, indicating 
that it is a superhero figurine.
The records, or rows, in this inventory data set represent the different products man-
ufactured in each product line. The columns that describe each inventory product for the 
WeMakeIt, Inc. inventory data set are listed in Illustration 4.9.
--- PAGE 14 ---
4.2  What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis?  4-13
ILLUSTRATION 4.9  Data Dictionary for the WeMakeIt, Inc. Inventory Data Set
InventoryCode
InventoryDescription
ProductCategory
UnitCost
NumberOnHand
Unique numerical code to identify inventory (primary key)
Text that describes the inventory product
The type of product (1 = medical, 2 = tool, 3 = toy)
Currency value assigned to each unit’s cost
Quantity of items in inventory
Description
Field Name
In addition to understanding the content of data fields in accounting databases, considering 
the source of the data is important because the quality of the data in the fields impact the qual-
ity of the analysis. Were the data created by an external party on a web page, entered internally 
by an employee, or automatically assigned by the computer? Do the data refer to a category, a 
measurement, or a calculation? For example, in the WeMakeIt, Inc. inventory data in Illustra-
tion 4.9, the InventoryCode field’s data are probably automatic sequential numbers assigned 
by the AIS system whenever a new inventory product is added. Since a human is not creating 
that field’s value when a new row is added, we can be confident that the InventoryCode data 
are consistently correct. Illustration 4.10 summarizes the typical internal data field sources 
often used by accountants.
ILLUSTRATION 4.10  Common Data Field Sources and Examples
Source
Description
WeMakeIt Inc. Examples
Raw Data Fields
Measured 
Raw Data
•	 Data created or captured by a controlled 
process capturing the value of the data. 
Examples include price, cost, number 
on hand, weight, date, hours worked, 
temperature, sensor readings, human 
observation, or economic value.
•	 Their format can be discrete or continuous 
data.
InventoryCost
NumberOnHand
UnitCost
Non-
measured 
Raw Data
•	 Data often created automatically by the 
computer or company policy for control. 
Examples include identification codes, chart 
of account numbers, standard descriptions, 
product category codes, or location codes such 
as city.
•	 These fields are typically formatted as discrete 
data.
InventoryCode
ProductCategory
Calculated Data Fields
Calculated 
Data
•	 Data created when one or more fields in a 
particular record (row) have any number of 
mathematical operators (such as +, −, ×, %) 
applied, and often are derived from using the 
data in another field or fields within the same 
record (never across different rows).
•	 These fields can be formatted as discrete or 
continuous data.
TotalCost  
(=UnitCost × NumberOnHand)
In the WeMakeIt, Inc. data set example, both the InventoryCode and ProductCategory fields’ 
data are non-measured raw data that have been formatted as numeric and discrete, mean-
ing that they are non-continuous and will never have partial unit values. These fields ­cannot 
be used in analysis for mathematical calculations because they refer to unique identifiers 
for inventory items and their product category group. The InventoryDescription field’s data 
source is also a non-measured raw data field formatted as a text field, which cannot be used in 
numeric calculations during the analysis.
The sources for data fields like UnitCost and NumberOnHand are different because they 
are measured raw numeric data, which can be used in mathematical calculations.
--- PAGE 15 ---
4-14  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Finally, UnitCost and NumberOnHand can be multiplied in an expression to calculate 
a new field within a query called TotalCost. This new field source is calculated data that 
is also numeric and likely to be used in a variety of different mathematical calculations in 
accounting.
A data field’s measurement scale refers to the type of information provided by the data. 
Data measurement scales should be considered when designing the data strategy, as they 
impact which analyses can be performed on the data. Data measurement scales are grouped 
into four categories: categorical, ordinal, interval, or ratio (Illustration 4.11).
ILLUSTRATION 4.11  Measurement Scale Descriptions and Examples
Categorical (nominal) data
Ordinal data
Labeled or named data that
can be sorted into groups
according to specific
characteristics. The data do
not have a quantitative value.
Ordered or ranked categorical
data. Distance between the
categories does not need to be
known or equal.
Interval data
Ordinal data that have equal
and constant diﬀerences
between observations and an
arbitrary zero point.
Ratio data
Interval data with a natural
zero point. A natural zero
point means that it is not
arbitrary.
Regions, product type,
account numbers, account
category, locations.
A survey question inquiring
about customer service may
ask customers to rate their
experience from 1 to 10.
Temperature, time, credit
scores.
Economic data, such as
dollars or euros.
Description
Example
Measurement Scale
Classification
Professional Insight 4.2: How Do You Select Financial Data  
for Analysis?
Jadon is an accounting and finance major, student athlete, and president of the first-genera-
tion student organization on campus. During his internship, he realized how much his career 
would involve data analysis of financial statement information.
On the first day of my summer internship, I was tasked with calculating 
ten financial ratios for five companies in the same industry for the most 
recent three years. I was left to figure out how to get the data and perform the calcu-
lations on my own. I reached into my sports experience to gather my courage by creating 
a game plan. First, I had to select and set up my analysis tool.
I chose Excel with the Analysis ToolPak and made a raw data template based on the totals 
I would need for the ratios in the first worksheet. I copied it five times for each company’s 
raw data. I made another worksheet for all the ratio calculations as the rows, and the com-
panies would be the columns, grouped by each year. I organized the ratios into profitabil-
ity, liquidity, and solvency groups. I entered ratio formulas that tied back to the raw data 
worksheet cells and documented my steps on another sheet to remember my choices.
Next, I had to find out where to get the data. I went to the SEC’s xBRL 
data and downloaded the financial statement information and entered 
what I needed into Excel. An unexpected benefit of having my ratios all in one sheet 
was that it was easy to make visualizations of my results. I was amazed by how clear the 
best and worst performing companies were from these visualizations. I saved my file and 
emailed it to my boss.
We discuss how data measurement scales influence analysis strategy options later in this 
chapter. Next, let’s examine the risks and controls related to our data strategy.
--- PAGE 16 ---
4.2 What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis? 4-15
 ILLUSTRATION 4.13  Representative Sampling Risks
Entire Population
Imagine a jar with 100
marbles: 30 blue marbles
and 70 white marbles.
If a sample of ten blue marbles was
extracted, it would not be
representative of the population as
the entire population has twice as
many white marbles.
A representative sample of ten
marbles would have three blue
marbles and seven white marbles.
Nonrepresentative Sample
Representative Sample
 That is why performing tests on the sample’s representativeness can either verify its validity or 
detect its significant weakness in representing the underlying marble populations. 
 The second risk is potentially including unusual data points in an analysis. Outlier data 
points are unusual data points compared to the rest of the data in either an activity point 
(x-axis or the independent variable), such as number of units produced, or an unusual level 
of the economic value (y-axis or the dependent variable), such as total costs or total sales. The 
best control for identifying outliers is to visualize the data in a graph to check if the measure 
 Consider Data Strategy Risks and Implement 
Controls
 Another benefit of documenting data strategy in a project plan is that examining each choice 
can help identify three common data risks that might affect an analysis’s validity, accuracy, 
and reliability ( Illustration 4.12 ). 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.12  Common Data Risks and Recommended Controls 
Data
Risks
Controls
Non-representative sample selections
Outlier data points
Verify representativeness of sample.
Perform a histogram or quartile analysis to 
identify outliers, then explain or justify the rule
used for outlier adjustment or removal.
Dirty data
Verify integrity of data set and clean up
dirty data issues.
 The first risk is that a sample extracted from a larger population of data are a poor repre-
sentation of the underlying population. For example, a random selection of different colored 
marbles might not be a sample that accurately represents the characteristics of the marble 
population ( Illustration 4.13 ). 
--- PAGE 17 ---
4-16  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Apply It 4.2
Identify Data 
Characteristics
Accounting Information Systems   Tremendous Toys has recently developed a database to cap-
ture inventoriable costs from their production each week.
Data has been extracted from the following data fields: 
SOLUTION
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
ProductionRunDate
Non-measured raw data
Interval
NumberOfToysinRun
Measured raw data
Ratio
ToyIDNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
DirectMaterialsUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
DirectLaborUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
OverheadCostApplied
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalRunCost
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalUnitCost
Calculated data
Ratio
Complete the three-column table by adding each data field’s type and measurement scale. 
is very different than the rest of the data. Identified outliers can either be remeasured (if pos-
sible) or removed with a logical and documented rule.
The final data risk is that a variety of data errors, or dirty data, are problematic for data 
analysis. Dirty data include missing, invalid, duplicate, and incorrectly formatted data. For 
example, the purchase orders, invoices, or checks written by the company should be sequen-
tially accounted for, with no missing numbers or two with the same identifying number. 
­Controls should always test for dirty data before the analysis is performed. Data can be com-
pared to its source documents, or if that is not possible, tested for reasonableness. Testing for 
reasonableness can include checking for missing sequence numbers, duplicate numbers, or 
verifying the data have the expected format or acceptable characters.
Once data have been selected, evaluated, and any risks identified and controlled, the next 
step is to develop an analysis strategy appropriate for the objective of the project.
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
ProductionRunDate
NumberOfToysinRun
ToyIDNumber
DirectMaterialsUsed
DirectLaborUsed
OverheadCostApplied
TotalRunCost
TotalUnitCost
--- PAGE 18 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-17
4.3  What Should We Consider When 
Selecting an Analysis? 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Explain how an analysis strategy is designed.
Consider these two questions when designing a data analysis strategy:
	 1.	 Can the chosen analysis strategy answer the specific objective questions?  
	 2.	 Is the measurement scale of the data appropriate for the selected analysis strategy?
Earlier in this course you learned there are four types of data analysis objectives: descriptive, 
­diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive. Each asks different questions of the data. We perform 
analyses to answer those ­questions. The specific analysis that can be performed on the data 
is influenced by the data’s measurement scales. Next, we summarize what to consider when 
designing analyses for projects with descriptive and diagnostic objectives.
Designing Analyses to Describe and Diagnose
Because understanding the phenomena captured by the data is essential, many data analysis 
projects begin with descriptive analyses. Diagnostic analytics involve many of the same anal-
yses as descriptive, but the focus is on explaining why something happened. Because many 
types of analyses can be both descriptive and diagnostic, it makes sense to discuss these two 
analysis strategies together.
The specific type of descriptive and diagnostic analysis used depends on the measure-
ment scale of the data. For example, calculating the median observation in the data requires 
using either interval or ratio measures. Illustration 4.14 shows some analysis strategies for 
descriptive and diagnostic objectives (checkmarks indicate appropriate analyses, and Xs indi-
cate analyses that are inappropriate for the measurement scale).
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  Analyses Strategies for Descriptive and Diagnostic Analytics
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Central Tendency
Mode
Median
Mean
Frequency Distributions
Both counts and %s:
Group frequency
Cumulative frequency
Relative frequency
(Continued)
--- PAGE 19 ---
4-18  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Data Dispersion
Minimum, maximum, range, quartiles
Variance and standard deviation
Normality, skewness, and kurtosis tests
Visualizations
Only bar and pie chart
Many other trends options
Histograms/box plots
Correlation
Scatterplots, Pearson’s R
Cross tabulation analysis
Calculations
Totals and subtotals
Percent change
Percent of total
Regression
Descriptive Analysis Strategies
Recall that accounting data are historic economic transaction and valuation data. Accoun-
tants, business managers, and regulators all want to know more about what happened and 
whether the data signals good or concerning news, so descriptive analyses are the most com-
mon analysis strategies using accounting data. It is useful for evaluating strategy performance 
because it provides more meaning and business intelligence than from just looking, for exam-
ple, at the totals reported on one year’s financial statements.
Let’s work through an example using the using the WeMakeIt Inc. accounts receivable data 
set to illustrate the explanatory power of descriptive analysis even when using categorical data. 
Recall that the objective for this analysis was to become more confident in the percentages 
used for estimating bad debts. The initial descriptive analysis results indicated a large increase 
in the number of customers with open invoices at the 2025 year end compared to the 2024 year 
end. This analysis had been designed to answer two descriptive questions:
•	Objective question 1: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the year end 
of 2024?
•	Objective question 2: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the end of 2025?
A data strategy and an analysis strategy were developed:
•	Data strategy: Use the categorical variable of CustomerNumber to identify customers 
with outstanding balances.
•	Analysis strategy: Count and compare the frequency of unique customer numbers with 
outstanding invoices at the year-end of 2024, and then repeat the analysis for the 2025 
year-end. Note that both count and frequency are analyses that can be performed on cat-
egorical data.
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  (Continued)
--- PAGE 20 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-19
ILLUSTRATION 4.15  
Outstanding Invoices by Customer 
Number 
Number of Customers
with Outstanding Invoices
at 2024 and 2025 Year-Ends
Number of
Customers
0
10
20
30
40
60
50
2024
2025
37
37
52
The results indicated that in 2024 there were 37 unique customer numbers with outstanding 
invoices, and in 2025 there were 52 unique customers numbers with outstanding invoices. 
Next, we discuss diagnostic analysis strategies.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.5: Be Careful Interpreting 
Initial Results
You might initially conclude that accounts receivable in 2025 has the potential for higher col-
lectability risk simply because there were more customers with outstanding invoices in 2025 
than in 2024. However, this initial judgment may be affected by internal assumptions and biases 
(Risks):
•	 The 2025 increase in the number of customers with outstanding balances may not be a nega-
tive result, as the company grew and added new customers in 2025.
•	 These results may motivate you to evaluate alternative explanations and perform new analyses, 
such as determining if the 2025 customer numbers with outstanding invoices at year end had 
more invoices owed in 2025 than in 2024, or if the value of their outstanding balances were high-
er in 2025, possibly signaling a cash liquidity concern This result is more closely relevant to our 
company’s accounts receivable risks of uncollectability (Alternatives).
Diagnostic Analysis Strategies
Diagnostic analysis strategies can be compared to detective work. Accountants can use these 
analysis strategies to identify and discover the most likely causes of accounting phenomena. 
While both descriptive and diagnostic analysis strategies are descriptive techniques, diagnos-
tic analysis strategies also identify what factors have caused the lower sales revenues or the 
higher costs, for example. Diagnostic strategies always require applying critical thinking skills.
Stakeholders rely on accountants across accounting practice areas to diagnose what is 
happening and explain, typically in non-accounting terms, why it is happening. For instance, 
systems accountants often use error dispersion data to identify system performance issues or 
unusual activity data that may indicate unauthorized party access.
Let’s use the WeMakeIt Inc. accounts receivable data set again, this time to illustrate diag-
nostic analysis: 
•	New objective question: Do the returning credit customers have more outstanding 
invoices at the 2025 year-end than they had outstanding at the 2024 year-end?
•	Data strategy: Once again, use the data set for the 2024 and 2025 year-end accounts 
receivable open invoices.
•	Analysis strategy: Group the data by CustomerNumber for this question.
Illustration 4.15 reports the results of this analysis.
--- PAGE 21 ---
4-20  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
To answer this question, we may choose to create a new, calculated ordinal variable (recall 
that a variable is a data item that will be used in the analysis). This variable will group credit 
customers into increasing ranges based on the number of invoices they have outstanding at 
year-end. There are some benefits to this strategy:
•	Changing a continuous variable into ordinal ranges results in meaningful groupings 
rather than a simple count of the number of invoices outstanding per customer.
•	The new ordinal variable allows a better understanding of the overall results of the num-
ber of outstanding invoices in total.
Let’s create three levels for outstanding invoices: ranges of 1-3 invoices, 4-6 invoices, and 7-9 
invoices as the new ordinal variable levels. Illustration 4.16 provides a visualization of the 
results of this analysis strategy. ( Data How To 4.2 describes how to recreate this visualization 
with a different tool.)
How To
ILLUSTRATION 4.16  Frequency 
of Customers with Outstanding 
Balances
Number of Outstanding Invoices
Number of
Customers
1–3
48
7
2
2
3
4–6
7–9
Number of Customers with Outstanding
Invoices in 2024 and 2025
0
20
40
60
2024
2025
27
The results of this second analysis show that the number of customers with 4-6 and 7-9 
­outstanding invoices had decreased in 2025 compared to 2024. However, there are almost 
twice as many customers with 1-3 past due invoices in 2025 compared to 2024. These results 
are mixed news for concerns about future accounts receivable collectability risks.
This surprise finding is a good reminder about the importance of critical thinking and 
deliberation about the initial analysis results. Thinking critically when interpreting anal-
ysis results involves evaluating both the analysis strategies performed and not performed. 
Skeptically questioning data analysis strategies can provide valuable insights, as this final 
analysis did.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.6: Controls for Risks 
to Analysis Strategies
Depending on the objective of the project, analysis strategies can involve a diverse mix of vari-
ables with different sources and measurement scales. Simply adding variables and complexi-
ties to analysis choices without justification can lead to information overload, which can impair 
your judgement. For example, sales forecasts might involve fewer variables in industries such 
as agriculture, as food demand is more stable, than for airlines, as travel is more discretionary. 
Professional risk-reducing habits include (Risks):
•	 Keeping analysis as simple as possible by including the fewest yet most relevant variables.
•	 Documenting each step, especially the benefits and drawbacks of each choice as you develop, 
evaluate, and choose an analysis strategy (Alternatives).
The process for analyzing WeMakeIt, Inc.’s accounts receivable, whether descriptive or diag-
nostic, involves an approach that can be used for most analysis strategies in accounting:
•	Start with a clear objective and specific questions that should be answered.
--- PAGE 22 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-21
•	Develop data alternatives, evaluate each on factors related to the objective, and select the 
best data strategy. Filter the data set down to the variables and ranges of interest necessary 
for the objective.
•	The best analysis strategies typically create new calculated within-row variables necessary 
for the analysis. These new calculated variables can be categorical groupings, ordinal rank-
ings, interval measures, and ratio variables. Remember that relevant groupings can make 
it easier to interpret results.
•	Calculate any vertical analysis measures necessary, such as totals, frequencies, averages, 
and measures of dispersion across the rows in the data set.
•	Finally, the analysis variables can be correlated or sliced by dimension variables to add 
insights from disaggregating the vertical measure total.
Descriptive and diagnostic analyses help to better understand what happened and why it 
­happened. What if the objective is to predict a future outcome or determine what strategies 
might achieve a specific outcome? In those cases, we need to use predictive or prescriptive 
analyses, which are explained next.
Designing Analyses to Predict and Prescribe
Predictive analysis strategies use historical data to create models that estimate a future value 
or outcome. Prescriptive analysis strategies, on the other hand, help determine which option 
is most likely to produce the best outcome given the objective. Predictive and prescriptive 
analysis strategies can determine the best use of resources, improve performance, anticipate 
market reactions and movements, and avoid process breakdowns:
•	Accountants commonly use these analysis strategies to evaluate tax planning options, 
operational and marketing strategy options, financing options, investment options, and 
exit strategy options.
•	Industries with these analysis objectives include lending institutions that want to avoid 
bad credit decisions and insurance companies that must anticipate natural disasters and 
disease onset so they can adjust business models before crises that cause their businesses 
to suffer happen.
Illustration 4.17 summarizes the most common predictive and prescriptive analysis strat-
egies used by accountants that do not involve advanced technology tools. The green check-
marks indicate appropriate analyses, and the red x’s indicate inappropriate analyses. As the 
illustration shows, there are not many predictive or prescriptive models for categorical and 
ordinal scale variables unless they are used in models in which interval or ratio scale variables 
are desired for the prediction.
ILLUSTRATION 4.17  Analyses Strategies for Predictive and Prescriptive  
Analytics
Trendlines
Regression analysis (linear)
Optimization models
What-if analyses
Ratio
Categorical
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Ordinal
Interval
= inappropriate analysis for the scale
Both predictive and prescriptive analysis strategies often use statistics and sophisticated 
modeling techniques for their algorithms:
•	Common tools for this include statistical regression, time series analyses, process min-
ing and mapping, text analysis, artificial intelligence models, data mining, mathematical 
modeling, complex simulations, and what-if sensitivity analysis modeling.
•	These models train themselves by leveraging patterns, relationships, and structures 
within the existing data to accurately anticipate future conditions and outcomes.
--- PAGE 23 ---
4-22
CHAPTER 4 Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
 The key to designing predictive or prescriptive strategies is to select data that will have the best 
potential to inform the predictive or prescriptive objective questions:
• If the goal is to predict next year’s production equipment maintenance expense, data 
that  helps explain the expected amount or increases or decreases in maintenance 
expenses are necessary. In other words, what variables drive changes in maintenance 
expense? Once those variables are identified, the related data can be selected and 
prepared for analysis.
• If we believe production level impacts maintenance expense, then include a data variable 
for the number of products produced, a measure of the most common levels of produc-
tion, or a measure of whether production is expected to increase or decrease from current 
levels. 
 Suppose the WeMakeIt’s auditors are testing the assumptions used to create the balance in the
the company’s allowance for doubtful accounts. The auditors developed a model that included 
three variables that might impact whether the invoices would be collected on time. The model 
predicts how many days outstanding an invoice may be based on the invoice amount, if they 
are a new (1) or existing customer (0), and the credit period allowed on their invoice. The 
result of the regression model is provided in  Illustration 4.18 . 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.18  Prediction Model for Accounts Receivable Days Outstanding
Multiple R
R Square
Adjusted R Square
Standard Error
Observations
ANOVA
0.825790307
0.681929631
0.681542056
3.549920129
2466
df
SS
MS
F
66518.36434
31025.95885
Regression
Residual
Total
3
2462
2465
97544.3232
22172.78811
12.60193292
1759.475173
0.0000
0.670515711
0.000903172
Intercept
InvoiceAmount
New or Existing Customer
Credit Period in Days
−7.961650225
0.000829906
1.535043063
0.189912705
8.082887691
−11.87392047
0.918879698
9.81036E-16
0.395420024
0.006452145
61.28504622
0.000
0.358248513
1.16228E-31
Significance F
Coeﬀicients
Standard Error
t Stat
P-value
Regression Statistics
 This model reveals that these variables (invoice amount, new or existing customer, and credit 
period) explain about 68% of the change in days outstanding for a customer (adjusted R-square). 
The model is significant with a Significance F of less than 0.05. The negative intercept corrects 
the model’s predictions by almost 8 days because customers rarely pay within the first week 
when they are offered an interest free period of time to pay their invoices. The significance of 
the intercept indicates that the mere existence of a credit period is a variable that impacts the 
number of days customers take to pay their invoices. With this model, the auditors can now
predict that a new customer with a $900 invoice and 60 days to settle will take about 16.5 days 
to make their payment:
−7.9617 +  $ 900  ( 0.0008 ) +  1 ( 1.5350 ) +  60 ( 0.3954 ) =  16.48  days 
 Analysis Strategy Risks and Suggested Controls
 The last two steps of a data analysis plan are to consider risks inherent to the data and analysis 
strategies and to put in place controls to reduce those risks.  Illustration 4.19 captures the 
most common risks that accountants face when analyzing data. 
--- PAGE 24 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-23
ILLUSTRATION 4.19  Common Analysis Risks and Recommended Controls 
Analysis
Risk
Control
The analysis is not appropriate for the variable’s
measurement scales.
The sample size is too small to allow for
accurate inferences.
Insuﬀiciently trained prediction and
classification models.
The sample is not representative.
Confounding variables are interfering with the
reliability of the information models.
The omission of relevant variables, or variables that
are unknown and not controlled for, resulting in less
reliable modeling.
Uncorrected and uncontrolled dirty data issues, such
as errors, empty fields, outlier data points, and data from
diﬀerent levels of quality sources.
Insuﬀicient knowledge about or experience in performing
the analysis strategy or interpreting the results.
Poorly made or misleading visualizations.
Failing to address the underlying uncertainties in
the context.
Review whether the analysis is appropriate for variables’
measure scales. Change analysis strategy if needed.
Test the reasonableness of sample with descriptive
analyses.
Perform the analysis with and without the confounding
variable to test for explanatory power diﬀerences.
Add available proxies for the missing variables to see if
the model’s explanatory power increases.
Properly prepare the data before starting the analysis.
(Data preparation is explained in the next chapter.)
Acquire proper training or work with a team that has
more collective knowledge.
Perform descriptive analyses to compare and augment
the visualization. Use visualization best practices.
Perform sensitivity analysis on all assumptions used
in the analysis decisions.
Gather more data to meet the model’s minimum data
points and assumptions, or select data analyses that do
not require large samples.
Include more data to train the models and fully verify
their accuracy before using them on the test data.
It is critical to consider these risks during analysis strategy planning and to add controls to 
help mitigate them. Without those controls we risk preparing, interpreting, and reporting 
incorrect analyses results, possibly causing ourselves or our stakeholders to make harmful 
decisions. Now that we have worked through the process of choosing the best data and analy-
sis strategies, let’s examine how accountants do this in professional practice.
Financial Accounting   Tremendous Toys has implemented a database to capture inventoriable 
costs from their production each week. Data from the following data fields have been extracted, not-
ing each field’s data type and measurement scale.
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
ProductionRunDate
Non-measured raw data
Interval
NumberOfToysinRun
Measured raw data
Ratio
ToyIDNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
DirectMaterialsUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
DirectLaborUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
OverheadCostApplied
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalRunCost
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalUnitCost
Calculated data
Ratio
Apply It 4.3
Create a Predictive 
Data Analysis 
Project Plan
--- PAGE 25 ---
4-24  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Using this production data, as well as the sales data for how many toys of each type were sold each 
month for the last three years, create a predictive data analysis project plan that will estimate Tremen-
dous Toy’s year-end inventory valuation at the end of the next fiscal year. Your project plan should 
address the following:
	 1.	Project objective and specific questions
	 2.	Data strategy
	 3.	Analysis strategy
	 4.	Risks in data and analysis strategies 
	 5.	Controls for data and analysis strategies 
SOLUTION
	 1.	Project objective
	
	 Specific questions
•	 Accurately predict the next year-end’s inventory value.
•	 How many units are predicted to be in inventory at the 
next year end? What is the predicted unit cost for each toy 
type at the end of next year?
	 2.	Data strategy
•	 Data from the last three years of Tremendous Toys’ pro-
duction records will be extracted and prepared for anal-
ysis regarding materials costs, labor costs, and overhead 
charges. 
•	 The sales units data by toy type for the last three years will 
be extracted, cleaned for missing, duplicate, and outlier 
data errors, and aggregated by month. This results in 36 
data points for the monthly unit sales of each toy type.
•	 A calculated variable for average monthly cost for each toy 
type will need to be created using the NumberofToysin-
Run and TotalRunCost fields. First, this data must be 
aggregated by month. Then, for each toy in each month, 
the total monthly production cost should be divided by 
the total number of toys produced to calculate the average 
toy cost per month for each toy type. The result will be 
36 data points for the monthly average cost for each type 
of toy.
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 The December sales in units can be estimated by running 
a regression on each month’s unit sales. 
•	 A calculated variable must be created for each month’s 
ending inventory units for each toy type, resulting in 36 
data points for each toy. This variable’s formula is: begin-
ning inventory units + monthly toys produced − monthly 
units sold. (You can assume that this business started 
three years ago with no beginning inventory.)
•	 The December year-end ending inventory in units can be 
estimated by running a regression on the monthly ending 
inventory units for each toy type. 
•	 The December year-end average cost per toy can be esti-
mated by running a regression on the average monthly 
costs per toy. 
•	 To calculate the total December ending inventory val-
uation, the December ending inventory units for each 
toy should be multiplied by its corresponding estimated 
December average cost. Then these total costs per toy must 
be added for the total December year end inventory value. 
(Continued)
--- PAGE 26 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-25
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 There may be missing, duplicated, or erroneous data in 
the fields selected for analysis.
•	 Costs may have changed over the three years due to sea-
sonality, changes in vendors, and inflation. 
•	 Calculations may contain errors.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Perform data cleaning tests to find and correct missing 
data, duplicates, and errors that result in outlier data 
points. 
•	 Compare the unit cost and sales per month to determine 
if an inflation factor, seasonality, or other changes have 
occurred. If data shifts are noticed, their cause and perma-
nence should be verified by speaking with the employees 
who would know the answers. 
•	 Each of the calculations performed should be verified, as 
well as the averaging calculations.
•	 Regression analyses can be verified by making visual-
izations of the three years of monthly data points and 
visually inspected for agreement with the regression 
estimations.
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies 
Differ Across Practice Areas?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ❹
Summarize data and analyses strategies in professional practice areas.
As the last step of the data analysis planning stage, accounting professionals across practice 
areas design data and analysis strategies based on their project objectives. Here, we offer 
examples of common data and analytics strategies for the accounting information systems 
(AIS), auditing, financial accounting, managerial accounting, and tax accounting professional 
practice areas.
Accounting Information Systems
Because a company’s accounting information system is involved in planning, executing, 
controlling, and reporting the business’ operations, data analysis projects in this area often 
involve interdisciplinary data and knowledge. These project objectives can range in scope 
from impacting just one or two employees to involving most of the organization. All four 
types of analytics objectives (descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive) are com-
monly used.
--- PAGE 27 ---
4-26  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
ILLUSTRATION 4.20  Number of Service Requests Each Month
Number of Service Requests
Service 
Requests
Months
0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
20
40
60
80
120
140
160
180
100
99
153
118
100
46
98
98
72
92
72
153
72
92
72
77
64
AIS data analyses projects may also choose data strategies which use quantitative interval and 
ratio data:
•	Costs such as equipment and software installations and updates, and IT staff labor.
•	Budget variances for any of these costs.
It is important to select data that captures the AIS system’s performance, vulnerabilities, and 
errors. For example, to analyze performance we could analyze the number of spam emails 
(ratio data) before and after investment in a new firewall.
Accountants designing analysis strategies for AIS projects are focused on increasing com-
petitive advantage and improving the organization’s operations. They often use statistics to 
understand which element of the accounting system they should focus on. The mathemat-
ical formality of statistical tools can help to persuade management to make the necessary 
investments.
There are risks involved with AIS data choice and analysis choices. Some common 
strategic and critical risks and suggested controls for AIS data and analysis are listed in 
Illustration 4.21.
The data analyzed in these projects can include a variety of IT operational data with dif-
ferent levels of data integrity and control documentation. More traditional accounting data 
are often analyzed with qualitative categorical and ordinal data:
•	Counts of help tickets and incidents.
•	Error counts and delay times.
•	Login issues.
•	System satisfaction and IT service satisfaction.
For example, Illustration 4.20 is an example of a visualization of the number of monthly 
service requests related to the accounting information system of a company. The objective was 
to identify how many and which months experienced more than the IT staff’s capacity of 90 
service requests.
--- PAGE 28 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-27
ILLUSTRATION 4.21  Risks and Controls for AIS Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Human behavior is not captured.
• Data manipulation from unauthorized
   access or untrained employees.
• Strong logs and segregation of duties in IT.
• Eﬀective back ups and graceful degradation.
• Clear procedures.
• Thorough data cleaning and triangulation to
   verify data capture.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data and change management controls.
• Data retention and destruction policies.
• Strong access controls.
• Loss of data due to security breaches,
   ransomware, or natural disasters.
• Diﬀiculties capturing high velocity data.
• Diﬀiculties measuring interdepartmental
   dependencies on process sofware.
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Errors in variable transformations.
• Verifying analysis steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations.
• Performing sensitivity analyses for critical results.
• Data availability windows are too short to
   capture more strategic trends and issues.
• Creating eﬀective visualizations and explanations.
Auditing
Auditors’ historic resistance to change, due to high litigation risks and Public Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) review of audit processes, is disappearing as new technologies help 
them perform higher-quality, lower-risk, and more efficient audits. Audit firms are increas-
ingly investing in technology and new ways to use it. They are reorganizing to offer new ser-
vices to provide more business intelligence and economic value to their clients.
Auditors use statistics to determine risks to account balances and unusual transactions, 
especially in journal entries that involve estimates and assumptions. They commonly work 
with different kinds of data sources, from process documentation, journal entries, general 
and subsidiary ledgers, trial balances, to financial ratios. Auditors use analysis strategies for:
•	Continuous auditing modules to test large data populations rather than testing samples 
with inference risks.
•	Automated identification of dirty data, unusual transactions, and pattern anomalies to 
better reduce audit risk and fraud risks.
•	Testing entire transaction cycles’ internal controls with process mining and tracing pur-
chasing to payment flows, P-cards (purchasing credit cards) usage and payroll documen-
tation. Testing the revenue cycle from order to collection.
•	Using robotic process automation (RPA) to remove the human (and often inconsistent) 
element of repetitive audit tasks, freeing auditors to focus on areas that require thought-
ful critical thinking and judgments. (RPA applications and benefits to accountants are 
explained in the chapter that covers data and analysis developments in accounting.)
•	Testing hypotheses about inventory and fixed assets with sampling, statistical tests, and 
inferences for the population of these assets.
--- PAGE 29 ---
4-28  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.22 is an example of auditors using a process mining analysis strategy to learn 
whether all purchases followed the correct process from requisition to the recording of the 
invoice for the purchase. The visualization indicates that more than expected purchases 
(308 purchases) skip the authorized purchase requisition process step as well as the autho-
rized order confirmation, goods receipt, and vendor invoice steps. These deviations from the 
authorized process are concerning to an auditor. The blue boxes indicate where the process is 
letting in purchase orders without purchase requisitions and letting out purchase orders with-
out the subsequent required steps. An auditor will then want to follow-up on these exceptions 
to the authorized process.
ILLUSTRATION 4.22  Process Mining Results for Purchases 
Analysis
Process Start
8,864
Create Purchase Requisition Item
8,556
Create Purchase Order Item
8,864
Print and Send Purchase Order (Paper)
8,864
Receive Order Confirmation
8,556
Record Goods Receipt
8,556
3,556
3,556
Vendor creates Invoice
8,556
Record Invoice Receipt
8,556
Process End
8,864
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
8,864
3,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,864
8,556
5,308
308
5,308
308
--- PAGE 30 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-29
Regardless of the data and analysis strategies used, auditors must identify the risks and con-
trols necessary to assure they can rely on the results of their analyses (Illustration 4.23).
ILLUSTRATION 4.23  Risks and Controls for Auditing Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing data.
• Dirty data.
• Strong audit trail tests of internal controls for
   data entry, storage, processing, and reporting.
• Testing authorization and access controls.
• Fake transaction data.
• Errors in assumptions.
• Verification of all audit steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations and conclusions.
• Checks on authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
Financial Accounting
Financial accountants are primarily responsible for capturing, recording, processing, storing, 
and reporting accounting information. Accuracy, thoroughness, and documentation are essen-
tial. The accounting data they use for analyses are both guided and restrained by accounting 
regulations and government agency compliance. Due to the measurement scales of the vari-
ables they need for analysis, financial accountants may have to transform data depending on 
their objective questions. These data most often include categorical, interval, and ratio data.
The purpose of a data analysis strategy might be describing and diagnosing based on cor-
responding financial accounting rules and regulations:
•	Nature, timing, and authorization of transactions (and diagnose issues) charged to each 
account.
•	Internal control effectiveness and weaknesses.
•	The completeness and reasonableness of adjusting entries at the end of the period.
Financial accountants also use analysis strategies designed for their predictive and prescrip-
tive objectives regarding financial outcomes for managers and board members. One example 
is estimating additional information to be presented along with their financial statements, 
such as:
•	Ranking alternative capital sources and costs of capital in terms of favorability.
•	Future net income and cash flows from operations, investing, and financing activities.
•	Impacts of new strategies on the financial statement.
•	Expected future costs associated with contingent liabilities, pension costs, new business 
units or the discontinuation of business units.
Financial accountants use statistics to identify opportunities and problems with profitability, 
liquidity, and business valuation. They analyze categorical industry codes from their client’s 
categorical groups of held to maturity, trading, and available for sale investment assets to 
ensure desired diversification risks and holding strategies.
--- PAGE 31 ---
4-30  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.24 is a waterfall chart that shows the analysis results for a project with the 
objective to better understand the monthly net cash flows for an organization by month. A water-
fall chart is a useful visualization to show the positive and negative components of a change.
ILLUSTRATION 4.24  Net Cash Flow Visualization
$8,000
$7,000
$6,000
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total
Net Cash Flows
$2,600
$2,350
$(900)
$(1,400)
$(700)
$800
$2,400
$(500)
$(800)
$2,350
$1,300
$(2,900)
$4,600
Increase
Decrease
This waterfall visualization shows the change in cashflow for each month. For instance, in 
February cashflow increased by $2,350 but then decreased by $900 in March. The net of all 
the monthly changes agrees to the total. Like other accountants, financial accountants must 
identify potential risks in their data and analysis strategies (Illustration 4.25).
ILLUSTRATION 4.25  Risks and Controls for Financial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing operational and adjusting entries.
• Dirty data.
• Strong accounting cycle steps.
• Strong internal controls for data entry,
  storage, processing, and reporting.
• Fake transaction data.
• Authorization and access controls.
• Testing for and correcting missing,
  duplicate, and outlier data.
• Incorrect valuation.
• Incorrect account.
• Incorrect time period.
• Missing data.
• Calculation errors.
• Verifying all cycle steps and calculations.
• Biases and self-interests.
• Checking authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
• Incorrect calculations.
• Verify applicable GAAP guidance.
• Not following GAAP analysis guidance.
Managerial Accounting
Managerial accountants add value to their organization with different data analysis strategies. 
The purpose of most managerial accounting data analyses is to improve planning, operational 
control, and decision-making to support an organization’s mission and strategies. This type 
of data analysis is valuable for improving the selection, execution, and evaluation of organi-
zational strategy. These kinds of analyses can also lead to decisions that give employees more 
access to information, which improves performance and, eventually, organizational culture 
and operations.
--- PAGE 32 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-31
Managerial accountants prepare analysis strategies, both for routine and ad hoc (one-time) 
objectives for each functional area of their organization. These strategies use data across mea-
surement scales to describe, diagnose, predict, and prescribe strategy impacts:
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business organization, policy and process will 
increase efficiencies, for example, to reduce non-value-added steps and delays.
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business partnerships, operations, and internal 
controls will increase effectiveness.
•	Increasing competitive advantage through many new business intelligence opportunities.
•	Improving compliance with all legal and regulatory regulations.
Managerial accountants may perform data analysis to determine the potential business pro-
cess and internal control benefits of automating the purchase requisition to vendor invoice 
process (see Illustration 4.22). Automation could force all departments to go through the 
authorized business process rather than going around it. Identifying risks to the data and anal-
yses used in managerial accounting is important to ensure analysis results are accurate and 
reliable ­(Illustration 4.26). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.7: Use Multiple Disciplines 
in Managerial Accounting
The knowledge base needed by managerial accountants is broad, involving multiple disciplines. 
For example, to reduce factory operating costs, managerial accountants must understand the 
engineering of their production machines and know how to create reliable statistical models 
for future production (Knowledge):
•	 Accounting and economic concepts
•	 Organizational behavior
•	 Operations management
•	 Technology tools
•	 Quantitative analyses disciplines
ILLUSTRATION 4.26  Risks and Controls for Managerial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
• Dirty data.
• Missing data.
• Independent verification.
• Segregation of duties.
• Verify authorization.
• Considering the purpose when
  making data choices.
• Irrelevant data.
• Sound personnel governance.
• Errors in calculations.
• Verifying all steps and calculations.
• Errors in attributions.
• Biases and self-interests.
Risks
Control Choices
Tax Accounting
Thanks to data analytics, tax accountants have more information for their tax planning and 
compliance services, which improves their judgments and how they document defend their 
--- PAGE 33 ---
4-32  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
positions to both clients and regulators. Recent surveys show that over 58% of tax accountants 
are using data and analytics strategies for many areas of their professional practice1, including:
•	Sales and use taxes and local taxes (SALT).
•	Value added taxes (VAT).
•	Goods and services taxes (GST).
•	Customs duties.
•	Transfer pricing and intercompany transactions.
•	Tax compliance.
•	Tax provisions.
Perhaps the biggest effect of data analysis strategies on tax practice is the movement away from a 
dependency on historic data and toward a forward-looking, value-adding service perspective by 
using predicting and prescribing analytics strategies. Examples of these predictive and prescrip-
tive analytics include using complex data modeling to evaluate decision and position alterna-
tives, which improves the value and accuracy of advice. Illustration 4.27 is a live dashboard that 
shows current year medical expenses compared to the level needed for itemized deductions for 
five of their individual clients. This would help the tax accountant provide advice to these clients.
1International Tax Review (2019). Preparing for the future of tax. https://www.internationaltaxreview.com/
article/2a6a41udxe4e2kuc8zoqo/preparing-for-the-future-of-tax (accessed 13 July 2022). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.8: Think Critically in  
Tax Accounting
•	 Tax accountants consider their clients, tax authorities, and their tax firm partners when they 
plan different data analyses. Each of these stakeholders may have different objectives and 
priorities. For example, clients may prioritize minimizing their tax obligations, so that would 
be the objective of your tax planning services (Stakeholders).
•	 Strong research and analysis skills are necessary, such as when performing tax research, devel-
oping tax strategies, and estimating tax liabilities. For example, state laws are different than the 
national and international law for every type of tax category (Knowledge).
•	 Clients, both individuals and organizations, may have incentives to omit taxable revenues and 
include irrelevant and inappropriate expenses. These data risks should be controlled, perhaps 
with interview questions as well as verifying the records provided through indirect tests of 
reasonableness (Risks).
Another example is sophisticated querying of clients’ accounting data to better identify oppor-
tunities, such as when to buy or sell assets, and understanding the operational decisions driv-
ing tax liabilities.
$(25,000) $(20,000) $(15,000) $(10,000)
$(5,000)
$-
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
Client A
Client B
Client C
Client D
Client E
Medical Expenses Excess (Deficit)
for Itemized Deduction
ILLUSTRATION 4.27  Medical 
Expenses Itemized Deduction 
Threshold Assessment by Client
--- PAGE 34 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-33
Analysis
Data
Risks
Control Choices
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Missing data.
• Implement backups.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data retention and
  destruction policies.
• Data authenticity and dirty
   data verification and correction.
• Tax management controls.
• Errors in data evaluations and tests.
• Verification of all tax rules’
   liability steps and calculations.
• Sensitivity analysis for
   critical results.
• Errors in calculations and forms.
• Eﬀective visualizations
   and explanations.
• Lack of tax code knowledge.
ILLUSTRATION 4.28  Risks and Controls for Tax Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Apply It 4.4
Match Strategies 
with Professional 
Practice Areas
For each of the following data and analyses objectives:
1.	 Identify the data measurement scale that would be utilized.
2.	 Identify one practice area that is likely to perform that analysis.
Some of the options have more than one correct answer for both (1) and (2), but only enter one correct 
answer for each.
Data Measurement Scales: categorical, ordinal, interval, ratio
Practice Areas: Accounting information systems, Auditing, Financial accounting, Managerial 
accounting, Tax accounting
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end open 
invoices on days outstanding.
Predicting cost savings and productivity increases 
from new AIS investments.
Creating dollar value stratified sampling plans 
for investment asset accounts.
Evaluating web server security incidents by type 
of incident.
Prescribing product revenue increases by product 
from marketing campaigns.
Predicting future cash flows from operations.
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Identifying risks and assuring that proper controls are in place to mitigate risks are also critical 
(Illustration 4.28).
--- PAGE 35 ---
4-34  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
SOLUTION
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end 
open invoices on days outstanding.
Interval
Financial and 
managerial 
accounting
Predicting cost savings and productivity 
increases from new AIS investments.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Creating dollar value stratified sampling 
plans for investment asset accounts.
Interval
Auditing
Evaluating web server security incidents by 
type of incident.
Categorical
Accounting 
information 
systems
Prescribing product revenue increases by 
product from marketing campaigns.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Predicting future cash flows from 
operations.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Interval
Accounting 
Information 
systems
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Ratio
Tax accounting
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Ratio
Auditing
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Categorical
Financial 
accounting
Chapter Review and Practice
Learning Objectives Review
❶  Identify the components of a data analysis project 
plan.
A data analysis project plan is a blueprint to follow for the project. 
Using a planning tool can help choose the best data and analysis strat-
egies for the project objectives. There are five steps:
•  Step 1: Focus on the project’s objective and the specific questions 
that must be answered.
•  Step 2: Decide which data are needed to answer the questions, 
develop alternatives, evaluate, and rank the best option.
--- PAGE 36 ---
Key Terms Review  4-35
deviation), visualizations, correlation, and calculations (e.g. 
totals, percent change).
•  Typical analyses used for predictive and prescriptive analyses 
include trendlines, regression analysis, optimization models, 
and what-if analyses.
•  There are many common risks inherent in descriptive, diag-
nostic, predictive, and prescriptive analyses that can be iden-
tified and controlled. Some of these risks include performing 
an analysis with dirty data, or analysis not appropriate for 
the variable’s measure scales, using too small a sample, or a 
­non-representative sample, or including (or omitting) variables 
from the analysis.
❹  Summarize data and analyses strategies in profes-
sional practice areas.
Each professional accounting practice area plans different data and 
analyses strategies for varying objectives, using data with a range of 
measurement scales to describe, diagnose, predict, and prescribe results 
for their stakeholders and objectives. The risks inherent to their data 
and analysis choices, as well as the controls they implement are a func-
tion of their roles, responsibilities, and project objectives:
•  Accounting information systems professionals plan data and 
analysis strategies for AIS governance, strategic planning and 
evaluation, operational performance, and compliance objec-
tives. Their projects typically involve business process function-
ality, business intelligence, and cybersecurity purposes.
•  Auditors plan data and analyses that have professional audit 
process compliance and audit quality objectives to verify the 
representativeness of their clients’ financial statement balances 
or their organization’s accounting systems. External auditors 
have the additional data risks of using data that has been cap-
tured and extracted by their clients, oftentimes not able to verify 
the data completeness or accuracy.
•  Financial accountants focus on regulatory compliance regard-
ing transaction capturing, recording, processing, storing, and 
reporting objectives.
•  Managerial accountants have a wide variety of internal gover-
nance, strategic, financing, investing, and operational objectives 
for their data and analysis plans.
•  Tax accountants focus on both compliance and more for-
ward-facing tax planning opportunities to serve their clients and 
organizations with their data analysis strategy plans. Similar to 
external auditors, tax accountants often must use data sets pre-
pared by their clients, which may have greater risks of inaccu-
racy and incompleteness.
•  Step 3: Consider the methods available to do the analysis and 
rank the alternatives. Evaluate and choose the best strategy 
option.
•  Steps 4 and 5: Consider critical risks inherent to both the data 
strategy and analysis strategy.
•  Steps 4 and 5: Embed controls to reduce these risks in data strat-
egy and analysis strategy.
❷  Describe how to develop a data strategy.
A successful project hinges on using the appropriate data and evaluat-
ing its characteristics. Considering the data’s potential impact on the 
analysis and any risks makes it easier to select the most suitable data 
for a project’s goals:
•  The first step is selecting the most appropriate data. Appropriate 
data are data that are available and relevant to the data analysis 
objective questions.
•  The data’s measurement scales must also be suitable for use with 
the chosen data analysis method, as not all analyses are valid for 
every measure scale. Data can have categorical, interval, ordinal, 
or ratio scales.
•  Data can be either internal (generated within the organization), 
external (obtained from a source outside of the organization), or 
a combination of both. Data can be raw measures or assigned 
non-measures, and can also be calculated fields. 
•  Consider potential risks related to the data chosen for the anal-
ysis and put controls in place to mitigate those risks. Three 
common data risks (and controls) include: non-representative 
samples (verify representativeness of the sample), outlier data 
points (identify outliers and then justify or remove), and dirty 
data (verify integrity of the data set and clean).
❸  Explain how an analysis strategy is designed.
There are two things to consider when designing a data analysis strat-
egy: (1) the objective questions and (2) the measurement scale of the 
data. There are four data analysis objectives: descriptive, diagnostic, 
predictive, or prescriptive. The questions we design are based on the 
objective:
•  When designing any type of analysis, the appropriate analysis 
is dependent on the measurement scale of the data. ­Typical 
descriptive and diagnostic analysis methods include measure 
of central tendency (mean, median), frequency distributions, 
measures of data dispersion (e.g. range, quartiles, standard 
Key Terms Review
Attributes  4-12
Calculated data  4-14
Data set  4-12
Dirty data  4-16
Fields  4-12
Measured raw numeric data  4-13
Measurement scale  4-14
Non-measured raw data  4-13
Records  4-12
Variable  4-20
--- PAGE 37 ---
4-36
CHAPTER 4 Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
 ILLUSTRATION 4.29  Sort Outstanding Invoices by Date 
Stocks Geography
A
Z
Z
A
A
Z
Z
A
Queries & Connections
Queries & Connections
Edit Links
Properties
Refresh
All
Data Types
Sort & Filter
Filter
Get
Data
From
Text/CSV
From
Web
Get & Transform Data
From Table/
Range
Recent
Sources
Existing
Connections
Insert
File
Home
Formulas
Data
Review View
Help
Page Layout
Acrobat
Draw
AutoSave
On
Stocks Geography
A
Z
Z
A
Queries & Connections
Queries & Connections
Edit Links
Properties
Refresh
All
Data Types
Sort & Filter
Filter
Get
Data
From
Text/CSV
From
Web
Get & Transform Data
From Table/
Range
Recent
Sources
Existing
Connections
1
Sort
 STEP 2:  Create a new column to the right of the data for the year-end date of 12/31/2025: 
• Add a label name for this column in row 1: “Analysis Date.” 
•  In row 2, enter “12/31/2025” and copy this date to the bottom row of data. This can be eas-
ily done by clicking on the bottom corner of the cell where “12/31/2025” was entered and 
dragging the cursor down to the last row of data ( Illustration 4.30 ). 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.30  Add Analysis Date Column 
12/31/2025
fx
1
E
B
C
D
A
F
G
InvoiceAmount
InvoiceNumber InvoiceDate
DueDate
CustID
AnalysisDate
$ 1,169.74
1405
1/8/2025
2/7/2025
121054
$     286.00
1501
2/6/2025
3/8/2025
121054
$     760.89
1551
2/18/2025
3/20/2025
121050
$     298.09
1651
3/22/2025
4/21/2025
121053
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
AutoSave
Oﬀ
2
 STEP 3: Create a new column to the right of the 12/31/2025 date column: 
• Add a label name for this column in row 1: “Days Outstanding.” 
•  Calculate the days outstanding by creating a formula in cell G2 which subtracts the invoice 
date (Cell C2) from 12/31/2025 cell (F2) for the Analysis Date. The formula is =F2-C2. 
• Copy this formula through all the data rows in Column G. Copying can be done by clicking 
on the bottom corner of the cell where the formula was entered and dragging in down to 
the last row of data, ( Illustration 4.31 ). 
 HOW TO 4.1
Calculate Year-End Bad Debts Estimation Using Excel 
The figures shown in the table in Illustration 4.2 were calculated in Excel.  Recall a few facts 
about this example:
•  WeMakeIt, Inc. estimates that 2% of its 30 to 60 days outstanding receivables will be uncol-
lectible, and that 30% of outstanding receivables older than 60 days will be uncollectible. 
•  The 2025 year-end allowance for uncollectible accounts unadjusted balance is $3,000. 
 What You Need :
Data The How To 4.1 data file. 
 STEP 1: Select the entire data set, but not the labels, and sort the outstanding invoice data by 
invoice date. The  Sort option appears in the  Data tab. ( Illustration 4.29 )
How To
How To Walk-Throughs
--- PAGE 38 ---
How To Walk-Throughs
4-37
 ILLUSTRATION 4.31  Data set with Analysis Date and Days Outstanding Columns 
12/31/2025
357
fx
1
E
B
C
D
A
F
G
InvoiceAmount
InvoiceNumber InvoiceDate
DueDate
CustID
AnalysisDate
$ 1,169.74
1405
1/8/2025
2/7/2025
121054
$     286.00
1501
2/6/2025
3/8/2025
121054
$     760.89
1551
2/18/2025
3/20/2025
121050
$     298.09
1651
3/22/2025
4/21/2025
121053
$     572.78
1724
4/11/2025
5/11/2025
121050
$     795.60
1999
6/22/2025
7/22/2025
121049
$     819.39
2033
7/3/2025
8/2/2025
12/31/2025
12/31/2025
12/31/2025
12/31/2025
12/31/2025
12/31/2025
DaysOutstanding
328
316
284
264
192
181
121050
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
AutoSave
Oﬀ
3
 STEP 4: Select the data field titles and data rows and create a PivotTable. This option is located 
under the Insert menu option on Excel ( Illustration 4.32 ).
 ILLUSTRATION 4.32  Insert PivotTable 
AutoSave
Insert
Recommended
PivotTables
Table
Illustrations
Add-ins
+ Get Add-ins
My Add-ins
SmartArt
Screenshot
Shapes
Pictures
Icons
3D
Models
Tables
PivotTable
Visio Data
Visualizer
Bing Maps
People Graph
File
Home
Formulas
Data
Review
View
Help
Page Layout
Acrobat
Draw
On
Recommended
PivotTables
Table
Illustrations
Add-ins
+ Get Add-ins
My Add-ins
SmartArt
Screenshot
Shapes
Pictures
Icons
3D
Models
Tables
Visio Data
Visualizer
Bing Maps
People Graph
4
 Select  New Worksheet . Your screen will automatically move to the new worksheet. Name 
this table “BadDebts2025.” The name appears at the top left of your screen. 
 STEP 5: Select any place in the PivotTable so the  PivotTable Fields appears on the right of 
your screen:
• Drag  Invoice Amount to the Values area. 
• Drag  Days Outstanding to Rows. The new PivotTable solution should appear ( Illustra-
tion 4.33 ) .
 ILLUSTRATION 4.33 Unpaid
Invoices by Days Outstanding 
Grand Total
9
8
7
4
 $        456.3
$     970.06
$  1,688.44
$ 1,912.04
$ 83,734.3
RowLabels
SumOfInvoiceAmount
5
 STEP 6: Next, select any row in the  Days Outstanding column: 
•  Right click and select  Group . 
•  In the dialog box that opens ( Illustration 4.34 ), enter a zero (0) in the starting point, 60 in 
the ending point, and then enter 30 for the  By option. Select  OK .
 ILLUSTRATION 4.34  Dialog Box 
to Group by Days Outstanding 
Grouping
Auto
Starting at:
Ending at:
0
60
By:
30
Cancel
OK
?
6
--- PAGE 39 ---
4-38  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Now the PivotTable has become three rows for the three desired age categories, with the sub-
totals already calculated for the Sum of InvoiceAmount column. Format the Sum column 
as currency (Illustration 4.35). Format the amounts as currency.
STEP 7: In the cell to the right of the SumofInvoiceAmount title, enter “Estimation %.” In the 
cell to the right, enter “$ Uncollectible.” Adjust column widths:
•	 In the cell to the right of the $ 20,441.46, enter “0.02,” and in the cell below enter “0.3” for 
the uncollectible percentages. 
•	 Format the $ Uncollectible column as currency.
STEP 8: In the cells to the right of each of these percentages, enter the following formulas 
using cell references: 
•	 For the 30-60 day group, the formula is:
=(click on cell with 20441.46)*(click on the cell with the 0.02)
•	 And for the >60 days group:
=(click on the cell with 33193.55)*(click on cell with the 0.3)
•	 An example of the formula and totals that result is shown in Illustration 4.36. Add an 
underline to the cell containing the last formula.
ILLUSTRATION 4.35  Age Group Totals for 
Accounts Receivable Invoice Values
fx
1
B
A
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
AutoSave
Oﬀ
Grand Total
>60
30–60
0–29
30,099.29
20,441.46
  33,193.55
$ 83,734.30
RowLabels
SumOfInvoiceAmount
$
$
$
ILLUSTRATION 4.36  Age Group Totals for Bad Debt Estimations
fx
1
B
A
C
D
E
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AutoSave
Oﬀ
Grand Total
>60
30–60
0–29
30,099.29
20,441.46
  33,193.55
0.02
0.3
$ 83,734.30
RowLabels
SumOfInvoiceAmount
Estimation %
=GETPIVOTDATA("InvoiceAmount",$A$3,"Days Outstanding",30)*C5
D5
408.83
$ 9,958.07
$ Uncollectible
$
$
$
$
7
8
STEP 9: Enter the sum formula in the next cell (D7 in this example solution):
=sum(D5:D6)
This sum is the desired adjusted year-end credit balance of allowance for uncollectible 
accounts. This total is $10,366.89 (also shown in Illustration 4.37).
--- PAGE 40 ---
How To Walk-Throughs  4-39
STEP 10: Compare the 2025 unadjusted allowance account balance, a $3,000 credit balance, 
to the calculated desired ending balance to calculate the amount needed for the adjusting 
­entry to ensure the allowance for uncollectible accounts has that desired credit balance: 
•	 Enter the unadjusted balance in cell D8 and the formula for the calculation in cell D10 
(Illustration 4.37):
=D7−D8
•	 You are now ready to make your adjusting entry:
Debit
Credit
Bad debt expense
7,366.89
Allowance for uncollectible accounts
7,366.89
HOW TO 4.2  Create a Frequency Bar Chart in Power BI
Illustration 4.16 can be recreated in Power BI by analyzing the outstanding invoices in 
accounts receivable by customer and creating a visualization that shows how many outstand-
ing invoices are owed by unique customers at the end of 2024 and 2025 in three groupings: 1-3 
invoices, 4-6 invoices, and 7-9 invoices.
What You Will Need:  Data   The How To 4.2 data file.
STEP 1: Upload the data set into Power BI:
•	 Open Power BI and Select Get Data.
•	 Select Import data from Excel and choose Excel Worksheet.
•	 Navigate to the saved the data set file and open it. 
How To
ILLUSTRATION 4.37  Completed Analysis of Bad Debts Expense Calculation
fx
1
B
A
C
D
E
Sheet1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
AutoSave
Oﬀ
Grand Total
>60
30–60
0–29
30,099.29
20,441.46
  33,193.55
0.02
0.3
$ 83,734.30
RowLabels
SumOfInvoiceAmount
Estimation %
408.83
9,958.07
Adjusting entry amount
Subract the unadjusted
balance in Allowance
$ 10,366.89
7,366.89
($ 3,000)
$ Uncollectible
$
$
$
$
$
$
9
10
--- PAGE 41 ---
4-40  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
ILLUSTRATION 4.38  Load Data 
into Power BI
Navigator
Display Options
Accounts Receivable_HowTo_4.2.xlsx [1]
Sheet 1
Sheet 1
Cancel
Load
Transform Data
CustID
InvoiceNumber
InvoiceAmount
InvoiceDate
DueDate
406
607
647
746
864
892
966
983
998
1000
1004
1010
1014
1031
1037
1042
1049
1054
4/5/2024
5/31/2024
6/12/2024
7/10/2024
8/18/2024
8/25/2024
9/12/2024
9/18/2024
9/22/2024
9/23/2024
9/24/2024
9/25/2024
9/26/2024
9/29/2024
9/30/2024
10/1/2024
10/4/2024
10/5/2024
10/8/2024
10/9/2024
10/10/2024
10/11/2024
10/14/2024
5/5/2024
6/30/2024
7/12/2024
8/9/2024
9/17/2024
9/24/2024
10/12/2024
10/18/2024
10/22/2024
10/23/2024
10/24/2024
10/25/2024
10/26/2024
10/29/2024
10/30/2024
10/31/2024
11/3/2024
11/4/2024
11/7/2024
11/8/2024
11/9/2024
11/10/2024
11/13/2024
121008
121035
121023
121038
121001
121009
121024
121024
121036
121008
121010
121011
121006
121014
121005
121005
121023
121018
121016
121037
121036
121014
121008
$    351.65
$     349.83
$     415.48
$     450.19
$    197.34
$     469.17
$          663
$     316.29
$    848.38
$       839.8
$     719.68
$     575.12
$     691.34
$       868.4
$     515.97
$     756.47
$     726.44
$     416.65
$    582.01
$    244.01
$ 1,376.05
$   1,125.8
$    811.59
1062
1066
1068
1070
1078
ana
1
•	 Verify this import by double-clicking on the data sheet icon on the left side of the screen. 
Look at the bottom left corner to verify that you have successfully loaded all 201 records of 
the data set (Illustration 4.39).
ILLUSTRATION 4.39  Verify Excel Import
File
Home
Help
Table tools
Sheet 1
Name
Structure 
Calendars
Mark as date
     table
Manage
relationships
Relationships
New
measure
Quick
measure
New
column
New
table
Calculations
InvoiceNumber
121054
121054
121050
121053
121050
121049
1405
1999
1724
1651
1551
1501
Friday, February 7, 2025
Saturday, March 8, 2025
Thursday, March 20, 2025
Monday, April 21, 2025
Sunday, May 11, 2025
Tuesday, July 22, 2025
Wednesday, January 8, 2025
Thursday, February 6, 2025
Tuesday, February 18, 2025
Saturday, March 22, 2025
Friday, April 11, 2025
Sunday, June 22, 2025
DueDate
InvoiceAmount
 $ 1,169.74
 $       795.6
 $     572.78
 $     298.09
 $     760.89
 $           286
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
Wednesday, December 31, 2025
AnalysisDate
DaysOverdue
327
298
286
254
234
162
1
CustID
InvoiceDate
	
Once the Navigator window opens, select Sheet 1 of the file listed on the left, then select 
Load (Illustration 4.38).
--- PAGE 42 ---
How To Walk-Throughs  4-41
STEP 2: Select the AnalysisDate column.
•	 In the menu under Column Tools, pull down the Format Field options and choose the 
last option “2001 (yyyy)” (Illustration 4.40).
•	 Verify the analysis date field has changed to show 2024 and 2025.
ILLUSTRATION 4.40  Change the 
AnalysisDate Column Format
Table tools
Column tools
 
0
Don’t Summ
Uncategoriz
Formatting
Properties
Summarization
Data category
Format
$
%
$%
.00
.0
“Wednesday, March
Date formats
*3/14/2001 (Short Date)
*Wednesday, March 14, 2001 (Long Date)
Wednesday, 14 March, 2001 (dddd, d mmmm, yyyy)
Wednesday, March 14, 2001 (dddd, mmmm d, yyyy)
March 14, 2001 (mmmm d, yyyy)
14 March, 2001 (d mmmm, yyyy)
3/14/2001 (m/d/yyyy)
03/14/2001 (mm/dd/yyyy)
03/14/01 (mm/dd/yy)
3/14/01 (m/d/yy)
2001-03-14 (yyyy-mm-dd)
01/03/14 (yy/mm/dd)
14-Mar-01 (dd-mmm-yy)
14/03/2001 (dd/mm/yyyy)
March 2001 (mmmm yyyy)
2001-03 ( yyyy-mm)
March 14 ( mmmm d)
01 (yy)
2001 (yyyy)
2
STEP 3: Select the CustID column by clicking on the column header. Right click and select 
Edit Query (Illustration 4.41).
ILLUSTRATION 4.41  Edit Query 
Selection
CustID
Sort ascending
Sort descending
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
Clear sort
Clear filter
Clear all filters
Copy
Copy table
New measure
New column
Refresh data
Edit query
Rename
3
--- PAGE 43 ---
4-42
CHAPTER 4 Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
•  This will open the Power Query Editor window. In this window, the CustID column will 
also be selected. 
•  Select  Group By from the top menu, and it will open. 
•  Select  Advanced . Right below the CustID field you will see the Add grouping button. 
Select this to add a second grouping for the field AnalysisDate. Then, below the new group-
ing box, in the New column name box, enter “CountInvoices” (do not enter the quotes).
•  In the pull down menu for  Operation , select  Count Distinct Rows and select  OK .  Close 
and Apply the Power Query Editor (Illustration 4.42). 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.42  Group By Customer  ID and Count Distinct Invoices 
Group By
Basic
Advanced
New column name
Operation
Column
Specify the columns to group by and one or more outputs.
Count Distinct Rows
CustID
Add grouping
Add aggregation
CountInvoices
Cancel
OK
?
 STEP 4: Select the  Count Invoices column. Select  Data Groups from the top column, then 
select  New Data Group ( Illustration 4.43 ).
 ILLUSTRATION 4.43  Select Data Groups 
Home
Help
Table tools
Column tools
File
CountInvoices
Whole number
Whole number
0
Sum
Uncategorized
Name
Data type
Structure 
Formatting
Properties
Sort
Groups
     Sort by
 column
    Data
groups
Summarization
Data category
Format
+
$
%
$%
.00
.0
123
2024
2024
2024
7
4
5
121008
121035
121023
CountInvoices
CustID
AnalysisDate
CountInvoices
Whole number
Whole number
0
Sum
Uncategorized
Name
Data type
Structure
Formatting
Properties
Sort
    Sort by
 column
Summarization
Data category
Format
$
%
$%
.00
.0
123
12
12
4
--- PAGE 44 ---
How To Walk-Throughs  4-43
Illustration 4.43 shows the dialog box that opens once you select Data Groups:
•	In the dialog box select List (not bins) for the Group Type.
•	Under Ungrouped values, hold the shift key down to select values 1 2, and 3.
•	Select Group. Double click the new group that appears on the right window and change 
the label to “1-3”.
•	Select the Other group, and move to the ungrouped left side. Select 4 and 5 together by 
again holding down the shift key. Select Group and move over to the right window. Dou-
ble click on the label for this field, and type “4-6” (it happens that there are no customers 
with six outstanding invoices, but the range will be 4-6 regardless).
•	Once again, select Other and move to the Ungrouped values window. Select 7, 8, and 9 
by holding down the shift key and selecting GROUP.
•	Go back to the right and double click on the label for this group. Change it to “7-9.” Select 
OK. (Illustration 4.44).
ILLUSTRATION 4.44  Create Grouping of Number of Invoices
Groups
Name
Field
List
Group type
Ungrouped values
Group
Ungroup
Groups and members
1-3
4-6
7-9
Other
Contains all ungrouped values
Include Other group
i
CountInvoices
CountInvoices (groups)
Cancel
OK
?
STEP 5: Now you are ready to create your visualization:
•	Select the graphing icon on the left of the screen.
•	Select all three variables in your Fields list.
--- PAGE 45 ---
4-44  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
ILLUSTRATION 4.45  Create the 
Visualization
Search
Filters
Search
Filters on this visual
AnalysisDate - Year
is (All)
CountInvoices (groups)
is (All)
CustID
is (All)
Add data fields here
Add data fields here
Filters on this page
Filters on all pages
Visualizations
Fields
R
Py
Axis
CountInvoices (groups)
Legend
AnalysisDate
Year
Values
CustID
AnalysisDate
CountInvoices
CountInvoices (...
CustID
Sheet 1
5
Your visualization is complete (Illustration 4.46)!
ILLUSTRATION 4.46  WeMakeIt, 
Inc. Accounts Receivable
1–3
0
4–6
CountInvoices (groups)
7–9
10
20
CustID
30
40
50
2024
2025
Year
Number of Outstanding Invoices by Unique Customers 2024 
and 2025
	
In the Visualizations pane, Count Invoices (groups) should be in the axis area. You 
may need to move the AnalysisDate field up to the Legend field by dragging it. The Count 
Invoices field should be in the Values area (Illustration 4.45).
--- PAGE 46 ---
Multiple Choice Questions  4-45
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Which of these is not an objective of data analysis strategies?
a.	 Collecting data.
b.	 Describing data.
c.	 Diagnosing data.
d.	 Predicting a future value of data.
e.	 Prescribing the impact of a particular strategy on the future 
value of the data.
2.  (LO 1)  Diagnosing objectives in data analysis strategies involve 
which of the following?
a.	 Looking for complete independence of variables.
b.	 Looking for causality in regression variables.
c.	 Looking for where to place the blame for bad operational 
results.
d.	 Looking for associations between data variables.
e.	 Predicting what future outcomes will be in the data.
3.  (LO 1)  The components of an effective data analysis strategy plan 
consider each of the following except for
a.	 analysis controls.
b.	 analysis risks.
c.	 analysis objectives.
d.	 analysis complexity.
4.  (LO 1)  Which of the following specific questions depicts a descrip-
tive analysis objective for accounts receivable balance at year-end?
a.	 How many invoices from the current year were collected 
during the year?
b.	 What was the total of all sales revenues, cash and credit sales, 
for the year?
c.	 How many salespersons were employed in New York City this 
year?
d.	 What is the average days in inventory for each of your product 
lines?
e.	 How many of the open invoices at the end of the year are past 
due?
5.  (LO 1)  You are asked to perform an analysis predicting the accounts 
payable balance at the year-end. Which of the following data sources 
are best to analyze for this objective?
a.	 A list of authorized new vendors for the year.
b.	 Open vendor invoices that refer to purchases already received.
c.	 A list of checks paid to accounts payable vendors during the 
year.
d.	 A list of purchase orders issued during the month of December.
e.	 None of these data resources are useful to predict the accounts 
payable year-end balance.
6.  (LO 1)  Assume you are asked to estimate the amount of uncollectible 
receivables at year-end. Which of the following is not an analysis risk to 
consider when estimating accounts receivable bad debts at year-end?
a.	 The number of full-time sales employees is reported 
inaccurately.
b.	 The calculation of days outstanding is inaccurate.
c.	 The company changed collection policies for certain 
customers.
d.	 There are new customers who are not included in the analysis 
of aged receivables.
e.	 There are mathematical errors in the summation of 
receivables.
7.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is an appropriate response to the 
data risk that the sample selected for analysis is inappropriate?
a.	 Add missing variables to see explanatory power changes.
b.	 Test a sample distribution form for statistical test assumptions.
c.	 Verify the representativeness of your sample.
d.	 Explain the rule used for outlier removal.
e.	 Know your outlier data point.
8.  (LO 1)  Critically thinking through the risks to a data analysis strat-
egy during planning will help avoid
a.	 data selection biases.
b.	 judgment errors from lack of experience.
c.	 interpretation errors from dirty data sets.
d.	 incorrect applications of statistical tests.
e.	 All of the these are possible costs from not considering the 
risks to data analyses choices.
9.  (LO 1)  A data analyses strategy is more likely to be successful if 
you critically think through
a.	 the analysis performed by your competitors.
b.	 the results you want to achieve.
c.	 the data that will best inform your questions.
d.	 your objectives for the analysis.
e.	 None of these help you perform better data analyses strategy 
planning.
10.  (LO 2)  Which of the following refers to the content of a data set’s 
row?
a.	 Data field.
b.	 Attribute.
c.	 Single occurrence of the data record.
d.	 All these define a row of data in a dataset.
11.  (LO 2)  Which of the following could refer to the name of a col-
umn in a sales invoices data set?
a.	 Invoice 3570.
b.	 Customers in Orlando, Florida.
c.	 CustomerState.
d.	 BankStatementDate.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
--- PAGE 47 ---
4-46  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
12.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is an example of knowledge you 
might need to acquire for data analysis strategy planning?
a.	 The analysis is appropriate for your data measurement scales.
b.	 An understanding of your biases.
c.	 Identifying the key stakeholders.
d.	 Analysis resources that are available for your compensation.
e.	 Compensation correlation with results.
13.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is not a data measure scale that 
can be used in designing your data analysis strategy?
a.	 Optimal data
b.	 Ordinal data
c.	 Interval data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 All of these are data measure scales.
14.  (LO 2)  Which of the following data measure scales allows for 
meaningful multiplication of data points?
a.	 Interval data
b.	 Categorical data
c.	 Ordinal data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 Group data
15.  (LO 3)  Descriptive analyses that include median central ten-
dency measures are appropriate for which data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical 
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All these measurement scales support the median central ten-
dency measure.
16.  (LO 3)  Diagnostic analyses that include data dispersion measures 
such as variance and standard deviation are appropriate for which 
data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for variance analysis.
17.  (LO 3)  Bar chart visualizations are appropriate for data with 
which measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for bar charts.
18.  (LO 3)  Which of the following objective questions reflects a diag-
nostic purpose for accounts receivable year-end balance?
a.	 How many outstanding invoices are there in the year-end 
accounts receivable balance?
b.	 What is the value of the year-end accounts receivable balance?
c.	 Are new customers causing the increase in outstanding 
invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance com-
pared to last year?
d.	 What is the median value for outstanding invoices in the year-
end accounts receivable balance?
e.	 What is the invoice that has been outstanding the longest 
period of time in the year-end accounts receivable balance?
19.  (LO 3)  Predictive and prescriptive analyses that include creating 
trendline visualizations are appropriate for which data measurement 
scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All of these measurement scales support using trendline 
visualizations. 
20.  (LO 2, LO 3)  Which of these analysis strategies involve categori-
cal and ratio data measurement scales?
a.	 Reconciliations of subsidiary ledger balances to the general 
ledger balance.
b.	 Depreciation schedules for all real estate assets.
c.	 Which types of capital sourcing have the highest cost of 
capital.
d.	 Changes to the tax rates applicable to their organization.
21.  (LO 4)  Managerial accountants would most likely plan data anal-
yses when which of the following occur?
a.	 Changes to the tax rates.
b.	 Elimination of the financial statement footnote disclosure 
requirements.
c.	 Changes to Securities and Exchange Commission website.
d.	 Changes to their organization’s performance.
22.  (LO 4)  AIS accountants would most likely design a data analysis 
strategy for which of the following opportunities? 
a.	 New technologies that can provide cost savings for opera-
tional processes.
b.	 New customers in the marketplace.
c.	 Turnover in the regulatory body leadership.
d.	 Changes to the footnote disclosures required by generally 
accepted accounting rules.
e.	 Changes in tax rules.
23.  (LO 4)  Auditors plan data analyses strategies for which of the fol-
lowing situations?
a.	 Evaluating the effectiveness of internal controls in their cli-
ent’s accounting system.
b.	 Evaluating the representativeness of an account balance on 
their client’s balance sheet or income statement.
c.	 Considering the risk involved in providing an audit opinion 
for a client.
d.	 Investigating whether a client’s assumptions for recording 
their lease liabilities is consistent with other companies in 
their industry.
e.	 All of these are examples of situations where auditors plan 
their data analysis strategies.
24.  (LO 4)  Financial accountants would most likely plan data analy-
ses strategies for which of the following?
a.	 Changes to the management team.
b.	 New competitors in the marketplace.
--- PAGE 48 ---
Brief Exercises  4-47
c.	 Changes to their assumptions and estimates for end of period 
adjusting entries.
d.	 Changes to the tax rates applicable to their organization.
e.	 None of these would motivate data analyses by financial 
accountants.
25.  (LO 4)  Tax accountants would most likely plan a data analysis 
strategy that can
a.	 describe cash outflows for business expenses during the last 
year.
b.	 evaluate changes to the financial statement footnote disclo-
sure rules.
c.	 compare advertising expenses to sales revenue increases.
d.	 compare organizational strategy options to predicted opera-
tional performance.
e.	 None of these would motivate data analyses by tax 
accountants.
BE 4.1  (LO 1)  Put the data analysis project plan components in their proper sequential order, starting 
with number 1 for the first step.
	___ a.  Embed controls.
	___ b.  Identify project objective and specific questions.
	___ c.  Design data strategy.
	___ d.  Consider risks.
	___ e.  Design analysis strategy.
BE 4.2  (LO 1)  Put the steps of creating a data strategy in proper order, starting with number 1 for the 
first step.
	___ a.	  Choose and value the factors upon which to rank the data alternatives.
	___ b.	  Evaluate data alternative rankings and select the best data strategy option.
	___ c.	  Based on the objective, develop a few data alternatives.
	___ d.  Extract, clean, and transform the data fields to prepare the data for analysis.
Brief Exercises
Review Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Describe the five components in a data analysis project 
plan.
2.  (LO 1)  Discuss why it is important for accounting professionals 
to focus on the objective and questions to generate data and analysis 
alternatives.
3.  (LO 1)  Describe data and analysis risks that should be considered 
when planning a data analysis project.
4.  (LO 2)  Define and describe the four measurement scales used as 
accounting data variables.
5.  (LO 2)  Explain how selecting certain data fields could be inappro-
priate for your project plan.
6.  (LO 2)  Provide examples of two common data risks and a control 
for each that would reduce the risk.
7.  (LO 3)  Discuss why it is important to know the measurement 
scales of variables used in the analysis when determining whether to 
design a descriptive, diagnostic, predictive or prescriptive data analy-
sis strategy.
8.  (LO 3)  Discuss why it is important to match the type of analysis 
performed with the measurement scale of the data.
9.  (LO 3)  Explain a trend analyses strategy, and provide an example 
of how an accountant may analyze sales using a trend analysis.
10.  (LO 4)  Assume you are a systems accountant working in the 
accounting information systems group at your company. You have 
been asked to perform data analysis to analyze the number of spam 
emails that pass through to employees before and after the company’s 
investment in a new firewall. Discuss data risks and identify related 
controls to minimize those risks in your analysis.
11.  (LO 4)  Assume you are an auditor working to test internal controls 
regarding p-card usage at a company. You have the following data fields:
EmployeeNumber
EmployeeName
P-cardTransactionDate
P-cardTransaction vendor
P-cardTransactionAmount
Describe a descriptive analysis strategy you can perform using the 
data strategy of the p-card transaction amount and any one of the 
other data fields.
12.  (LO 4)  Assume you are a tax accountant evaluating an individu-
al’s financial records for their federal tax compliance. What data risks 
should be considered?
--- PAGE 49 ---
4-48  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
PONo
VendID
VendorName
Vendor 
Quality
Vendor 
Payterms
PODate
PO 
ItemNo
ItemCost
ItemQty
2001
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/1/2023
23568
41.99
12
2002
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/2/2023
23567
31.99
12
2003
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
32425
15.99
11
2004
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
12/4/2023
32426
15.99
10
2005
784
Playtime Toys
4
1/15 net 30
12/5/2023
32427
15.99
25
2006
258
Snappy Supplies
5
net 45
12/6/2023
11246
3.25
26
2007
153
2
2/10 net 60
12/7/2023
11258
333.25
35
153
Production
2
2/10 net 60
12/8/2023
11259
6.75
45
2009
783
Pep N Supply
3
1/10 net 30
12/9/2023
23566
22.99
100
BE 4.3  (LO 1)  Financial Accounting   For each of the following, list which critical thinking element 
is most clearly involved (S = Stakeholders; P = Purpose; A = Alternatives; R = Risks; K = Knowledge):
	___ 1.  Knowing what valuation procedure to use for U.S. GAAP.
	___ 2.  Considering the impact of the analysis results.
	___ 3.  The basis for the appropriateness of your data selections.
	___ 4.  Not just going with the first idea that you think of for your data and your analysis.
	___ 5.  Performing an analysis that is not appropriate for the measurement scale of your data.
BE 4.4  (LO 2)  Match the data measurement scale that could be utilized to each example.
Measurement scales can be used once, more than once, or not at all. 
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Interval
d.	 Ratio
Example
Measurement Scale
	 1.	Customer survey ratings. 
	 2.	Account numbers in the chart of accounts. 
	 3.	States or regions of the country. 
	 4.	Book value of depreciable assets. 
	 5.	Transaction dates, such as the dates orders are shipped. 
	 6.	Credits scores of loan applicants.
	 7.	The VendorID field. 
	 8.	Sales revenues. 
	 9.	The set weight of product boxes shipped. 
	10.	Supermarket inventory product type, such as produce, pet food, 
meat, and frozen foods. 
BE 4.5  (LO 2)  Auditing   Assume you are an audit senior responsible for supervising this year’s intern 
on a data analysis project related to the client’s purchases. You provided the intern with a data set and 
requested that the intern review the data set and be prepared to discuss. An excerpt of the data follows.
	 1.	 The intern stated, “Reviewing the data set, I classified VendorID as a measured raw data field 
source.” Explain why VendorID should be considered non-measured raw data.
	 2.	 The intern stated, “The VendorQuality data field must be considered ratio data because we can 
analyze this as a variable in our analysis.” Explain why the VendorQuality data field should not be 
considered ratio data.
	 3.	 The intern said, “The ItemCost and ItemQty data fields can be combined to create a calculated data 
field.” Explain why this is correct.
	 4.	 Based on your review of the excerpt of the data set, what data risks would you expect the intern to identify?
	 5.	 Assume you asked the intern to verify the accuracy of the PO number 2006. What would the intern 
review to determine if the data in the database is accurate?
--- PAGE 50 ---
Brief Exercises  4-49
BE 4.6  (LO 2)  For each of the following, identify if the data field is a (MRD) measured raw data field, a 
(NRD) non-measured raw data field, or a (CAL) calculated field.
	___ 1.  ProductIdentificationCode
___ 2.  UnitCost for each inventory item
___ 3.  TotalCost
___ 4.  GrossProfit
___ 5.  ProductCategory
___ 6.  NumberOnHand in the warehouse of each product
BE 4.7  (LO 3)  Identify the objective of each of the following analysis strategies as
describe, diagnose, predict, or prescribe.
Strategy
Objective
	 1.	Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end open invoices on days outstanding 
to understand what is happening in accounts receivable.
	 2.	Estimating cost savings and productivity increases from new AIS 
investments.
	 3.	Creating dollar value stratified sampling plans for investment asset 
accounts.
	 4.	Counting and ranking web server security incidents by week.
	 5.	Estimating product revenue increases by product from marketing 
campaigns.
	 6.	Estimating future cash flows from a continuing current operations 
strategy.
	 7.	Calculating before-after cost reductions from system investments.
	 8.	Testing different tax planning strategies by evaluating future cash savings.
	 9.	Estimating inventory counts at year-end by sampling a few of the stores 
and making population inferences.
	10.	Frequency counts for unfulfilled or open-partial sales orders so that they 
can be resolved.
BE 4.8  (LO 3)  For each data structure and analysis listed for descriptive and diagnostic objectives, indi-
cate whether the analysis can be performed with a “Yes” or “No.”
___ 1.  The calculation of the mode on categorical data.
___ 2.  The variance dispersion of ordinal data.
___ 3.  The calculation of median on interval data.
___ 4.  Cumulative frequency distributions on categorical data.
___ 5.  A visualization of categorical data trends.
___ 6.  Cross tabulation correlations of ratio data.
BE 4.9  (LO 3)  For each data structure and analysis listed for predictive and prescriptive objectives, indi-
cate whether the analysis can be performed with a “Yes” or “No.”
___ 1.  Trendlines on categorical data.
___ 2.  Regression analysis of ordinal data.
___ 3.  Optimization modeling of interval data.
___ 4.  Regression analysis of categorical data.
___ 5.  What-if analysis of ratio data.
___ 6.  Trendlines on ratio data.
BE 4.10  (LO 4)  Auditing   For each of the following data strategies used by auditors, provide at least 
one risk that should be controlled to rely on the results of the analysis.
	 1.	 Sampling the clients’ transactions by the size of the transactions impacting an account.
	 2.	 Comparing the estimations and assumptions used by management this year to last year.
	 3.	 Requesting confirmations of all year-end bank account, accounts receivable, and accounts payable 
balances.
--- PAGE 51 ---
4-50  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
BE 4.11  (LO 4)  Accounting Information Systems   For each of the following analyses strategies for 
AIS projects, identify whether the project’s objective is descriptive or diagnostic (D) or predictive or pre-
scriptive (P):
Strategy
Objective
	 1.	Calculating the average amount of time each department in the revenue 
cycle takes to perform its function per order.
	 2.	Calculating the cost savings expected from moving to RFID (radio free 
identification) technologies for inventory identification, pricing, and 
costing.
	 3.	Estimating how much server space would be needed for the AIS if sales 
revenues were to increase by 10% each year for the next five years.
	 4.	Detecting at which times of day and by which channel the unauthorized 
access is occurring to the customer relationship management module.
BE 4.12  (LO 4)  Financial Accounting   Assume you are a financial accountant tasked with selecting 
the best ­financing alternative for your organization. Suggest a data strategy and an analysis strategy for 
this objective.
Exercises
EX 4.1  (LO 1)  Match Project Plan Components Match the data analysis project plan component to 
each of the following statements:
	 a.	 Project objectives and questions
	 b.	 Data strategy
	 c.	 Analysis strategy
	 d.	 Critical risks
	 e.	 Embedded controls
	___ 1.  Verifying data values for reasonableness.
	___ 2.  Data formatting that must be transformed before analysis.
	___ 3.  Predicting next year’s sales volume.
	___ 4.  Sales volume data.
	___ 5.  Using regression analysis to predict next year’s sales volume.
	___ 6.  Diagnosing what is causing the cost overruns in the production process.
	___ 7.  Use of different scales on the y-axis and x-axis across visualizations.
EX 4.2  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Financial Accounting   Design a Data Strategy and an 
Analysis Strategy Assume your motivation for performing data analysis is to maximize sales revenues. 
Your specific objective questions are to determine whether sales volume is increasing, stable, or dropping 
for each of your company’s product lines this year compared to last year. Describe one possible data strat-
egy and analysis strategy for this objective.
EX 4.3  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   Match Data Strat-
egy Choices Match each objective to the following data selections.
	 a.	 Labor cost data
	 b.	 Production run data
	 c.	 Past marketing strategy data
	 d.	 IT service satisfaction survey data
	 e.	 Online market sales data
	 f.	 Sales contract data
	___ 1.  What is causing our large production materials usage variance?
	___ 2.  Which marketing strategy is most likely to increase our market share?
	___ 3.  Are we in compliance with U.S. GAAP procedures for revenue recognition?
	___ 4.  Which of our product lines could be sold online as well as in the store?
	___ 5.  Is the turnover in our IT staff impacting their service to the other functional areas?
	___ 6.  Are our payroll costs increasing?
--- PAGE 52 ---
Exercises  4-51
EX 4.4  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Design Data Strategies The following is a list of the avail-
able fields in a data set from a pet supply store.
Data Field
Description
	 1.	PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
	 2.	VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
	 3.	VendorName
Vendor name
	 4.	VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional
	 5.	VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
	 6.	VendorCity
Mailing address city
	 7.	VendorState
Mailing address state
	 8.	VendorZip
Mailing address zip
	 9.	VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor
	10.	PODate
Purchase order date
	11.	POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number
	12.	POItemDescription
Description of item
	13.	ItemCost
Cost of the inventory item per negotiated terms with vendor
	14.	ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased
For each of the following objectives (a, b, c), identify the minimum data fields (1-14) you would select for 
your data strategy:
	 a.	 Your objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases, so you want to identify which 
vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year.
	 b.	 Your objective is to determine which inventory items have the greatest cost increases over the past 
five years.
	 c.	 Your objective is to identify the five vendors from whom you made the highest value of purchases 
last year.
EX 4.5  (LO 2)  Prepare a Project Plan You graduate in one month from your undergraduate program. 
Your objective is to successfully apply to both professional jobs and graduate school. In your applica-
tion materials, you want to show how your grades improved as you moved from your general education 
courses to the courses in your major. Describe your data strategy, your analysis strategy, and three possi-
ble risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.6  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   Data Strategy Risks and Controls Assume your data anal-
ysis objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of your purchases from vendors. Your analysis strategy is 
to identify which vendor transported your purchases across the most miles last year. You have selected 
the following data fields for your data strategy.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number
VendorName
Vendor name
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name
VendorCity
Mailing address city
VendorState
Mailing address state
VendorZip
Mailing address zip
PODate
Purchase order date
Identify three data risks and data controls you could use for those risks.
--- PAGE 53 ---
4-52  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
EX 4.7  (LO 3)  Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are an internal 
auditor working with your company’s outdoor gear sales department to devise a new strategy for sales 
commissions that incentivizes higher profits than your current flat commission strategy. Describe a data 
strategy, an analysis strategy and three possible risks you need to control by providing control suggestions.
EX 4.8  (LO 3)  Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You are a managerial accountant 
for Sihrya’s Beauty Supply Store. You have been asked to predict next year’s contribution margin. A sam-
ple of the available data for your analysis is included here.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Receipt Number
SaleReceiptNo
Sales Date
Saledate
Inventory Code
InvCode
Number Sold
NoSold
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Describe a data strategy, an analysis strategy, and three possible risks you need to control by providing 
control suggestions.
EX 4.9  (LO 3)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Prepare a Project Plan You work 
as a financial analyst for a large coffee shop chain, such as Starbucks. Your objective is to diagnose which 
stores have increasing sales. Your data strategy is to use the store sales monthly data from the past two 
years. Design an analysis strategy, including which risks you should consider and controls that would 
help mitigate those risks.
EX 4.10  (LO 1- 4)  Auditing   Accounting Information Systems   Prepare a Project Plan You are 
working in the accounting information systems group at your company. You have been asked to evaluate 
the internal controls associated with authentication of users into the information system. Your manager 
has asked you to perform a descriptive analysis of failed login attempts. Your manager has provided you 
with the analysis objective and question. Using the chart, document your data and analysis choices and 
risks and controls for each.
Objective and Questions
Data and  
Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Evaluate internal 
controls associated with 
authentication of users
Questions: What are the mean, 
median, standard deviation, 
and distribution of failed login 
attempts during the current year?
1. Data:
2. Analysis:
3. Data:
4. Analysis:
5. Data:
6. Analysis:
--- PAGE 54 ---
Exercises  4-53
EX 4.11  (LO 1-4)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting Prepare a Project Plan You 
are a financial analyst at Sihrya’s Beauty Salon. The company owner has asked you to perform data anal-
yses to understand the products that contribute to the salon’s retail store’s profitability. The owner pro-
vided you a data dictionary, presented here, describing data that you may consider using in your analysis.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Receipt Number
ReceiptNo
POS assigned receipt number uniquely 
identifying each sale.
Sales Date
SaleDate
Date of sale per the POS.
Inventory Code
InvCode
Unique inventory identification number 
for each product in the salon’s retail store.
Number Sold
NoSold
Quantity of items sold.
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Description of the inventory item.
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Gross sales price of the inventory item.
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Weighted average cost of the inventory 
item.
	 1.	 State the owner’s objective for your data analysis project.
	 2.	 Assume your analysis question is to identify the products that have the highest gross profit. Identify 
the data fields you should include in your analysis. Identify the data analysis choices to answer this 
analysis question.
	 3.	 Identify risks and the related control choices related to the analysis question.
EX 4.12  (LO 1-4)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Select a Data Strategy and Perform an Analy-
sis You are a managerial accountant working at a multi-location pet care retail company. Your supervisor 
has asked you to compare the dollar amount of purchases made from each vendor in December 2024 
compared to December 2025. After discussing with your supervisor, you have identified the following:
Objective: Compare total purchases by vendor in December 2024 and December 2025.
Question: In 2024 and 2025, from which vendors were the most purchases (in dollars) made? 
Data: You have access to the following data.
Data Field
Description
PONo
Uniquely assigned purchase order number.
VendorID
Uniquely assigned vendor number.
VendorName
Vendor name.
VendorQuality
Quality rating ranging from 1 - 6 where 1 = poor and 6 = exceptional.
VendorAddress
U.S postal mailing address and street name.
VendorCity
Mailing address city.
VendorState
Mailing address state.
VendorZip
Mailing address zip.
VendorPayterms
Payment terms negotiated with the vendor.
PODate
Purchase order date.
POItemID
Uniquely identifiable item number.
POItemDescription
Description of item.
ItemCost
Cost of the item per negotiated terms with vendor.
ItemQty
Total quantity of items purchased.
	 1.	 Which data items would you use in your data strategy?
	 2.	 Design an analysis strategy to identify the vendor or vendors in which the company had a higher 
dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.
	 3.	 Perform the analysis per your analysis strategy. Identify the vendors in which the company had a 
higher dollar amount of purchases in 2025 compared to 2024.
--- PAGE 55 ---
4-54  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Problems
PR 4.1  (LO 1- 4)  Data   Auditing   Managerial Accounting   Complete Project Plan You work in 
the internal audit group in your organization, and your supervisor has asked you to analyze p-card data. 
The objective of the analysis is to understand p-card spending in the current year. The questions associ-
ated with the objective include:
•  With which three vendors does the company spend the most money using p-cards?
•  Which employee spends the highest dollar amount of money using the p-card?
Review the data and complete the chart to document your data and analysis strategy choices. 
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand p-card 
spending in the current year.
Questions:
•	 What are the three ven-
dors where the Company 
spends the most money 
using p-cards?
•	 Which employee spends 
the highest dollar amount 
of money using the p-card?
Data: Use the data provided in  
the Excel file.
Analysis: Use Excel to create a 
PivotTable that allows grouping of 
the p-card spending data by vendor 
and sort by the highest vendor.
Use Excel to create a PivotTable to 
group p-card spending amount by 
employee and sort by the highest 
dollar amount by employee.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis:
3. Data: 
4. Analysis:
	 5.	 Perform the analyses suggested in the chart. Summarize your results.
PR 4.2  (LO 1, 2, 3)  Data   Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   Complete Steps 2 
and 3 of a Project Plan and Perform Analysis. You are a financial analyst at Sihrya’s Beauty Salon. 
The owner has asked you to perform data analyses to understand the products that contribute to the 
salon’s retail store’s profitability. The owner gave you a data dictionary, which is presented here, describ-
ing data that you may consider using in your analysis.
Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Receipt Number
ReceiptNo
POS assigned receipt number 
uniquely identifying each sale.
Sales Date
Saledate
Date of sale per the POS.
Inventory Code
InvCode
Unique inventory identification 
number for each product in the 
salon’s retail store.
Number Sold
NoSold
Quantity of items sold.
Inventory Description
InvDesc
Description of the inventory item.
Inventory Price
InvPrice
Gross sales price of the inventory 
item.
Inventory Cost
InvCost
Weighted average cost of the 
inventory item.
Assume your analysis objective is to identify the products that contribute the most to the salon’s retail 
store profitability. Your specific questions are: Which products have the highest units sold? Which prod-
ucts have a positive gross profit margin? Use the information provided to answer the following questions:
	 1.	 Identify the data fields to include in your data strategy.
	 2.	 Identify a data strategy that could be used to answer the objective questions.
	 3.	 Identify an analysis strategy that could be used to answer the objective questions.
	 4.	 Review the data provided to perform the analysis. After performing the analysis, identify the top two 
products that contribute to the salon’s profitability.
--- PAGE 56 ---
Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI) 4-55
 PR 4.3  (LO 1-4) Data
Managerial Accounting
Complete the Project Plan and Perform the 
Analysis As a financial analyst at a hospitality industry company, you have been asked to design a data 
analysis strategy to understand the factors that influence a guest’s quality rating. Your team adminis-
tered a survey of guests staying at your properties during the month of June. The database team has 
linked the survey responses for quality rating of the stay to the guest’s location, check-in and check-out 
date, and spending amounts. They indicated that they only included data related to surveys completed 
September 1 through September 10. 
  1.  Which data measurement scales are included in the data fields labeled Location, QualityRating, and 
SpendingAmount? 
  2.  Review the data set, identify data risks present in the data set, and suggest controls for these risks. 
  3.  Assume a member of your team suggested that you use the data to predict the quality rating of 
future stays. To do this predictive analysis, you would have to use the quality rating data in a predic-
tive analysis strategy. How would you respond to your team member about the appropriateness of 
using this type of analysis? 
  4.  Use this data set to design and perform a different, original data strategy and an analysis strategy to 
satisfy the objective question. Document your data strategy, analysis strategy, risks, and controls and 
present your analysis results. 
PR 4.4 (LO 1-4) Data
Tax Accounting
Complete the Project Plan and Perform the Analysis
Beautiful Bites is a chain of bakeries located in Colorado. Its owners are committed to social sustain-
ability values and want to focus their philanthropy in the municipalities where they are collecting the 
most sales tax. The objective of the data analysis is to determine where most of their customers live. The 
specific questions is: In which communities do most of our customers reside? 
1. Prepare the data analysis project plan.
2. Perform the analysis and summarize the results. 
 Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI)
 Automated Transportation, Inc. is a medium-sized manufacturer of remote-controlled cars, boats, and 
drones. The company was established five years ago when two brothers decided to build and sell remote 
control cars to enthusiasts. As the company grew, they expanded their product offerings to include 
remote control cars, boats, and drones. The brothers serve as the president and CEO of the company, and 
they now have over 70 employees. 
 They have two key customer groups, hobbyists and businesses interested in incorporating drones 
into their business process and supply chain. These two customer bases provide a variety of opportunities 
for growth.  Management values internal control, but since they are busy running the company they have 
employed accounting personnel to help design the company’s processes, policies, and internal controls:
•  The company is not required to have a report on internal controls and external auditors are not 
required to attest to the company’s internal controls. 
•  However, the owners want to be sure the company employees are designing and following policies 
that will help them maintain efficient and effective operations. 
•  The owners are also very data-driven and make many of their business decisions only after consid-
ering the data collected and analyzed. 
 The following is an excerpt from the data dictionary designed by the company’s information systems 
personnel and accounting information systems accountants.
 Data Field Label 
 Field Name in Database 
 Field Description 
 Invoice number 
 InvoiceNO 
 The invoice number, which is hand 
keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk from 
a manual invoice mailed to the company 
by the vendor. 
 Invoice amount 
 InvoiceAmt 
 The amount of the invoice, which is
hand-keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk 
from a manual invoice mailed to the 
company by the vendor. 
 Shipment date 
 ShipDate 
 The date the product was shipped from 
the shipping location. 
(Continued)
--- PAGE 57 ---
4-56  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Data Field Label
Field Name in Database
Field Description
Invoice date
InvoiceDate
The date of the invoice, which hand-
keyed into the AIS by the AP clerk from 
a manual invoice mailed to the company 
by the vendor.
Vendor identification 
number
VendorID
Unique vendor identification number.
Vendor name
VendorName
Name of the vendor.
Product purchased
ProductID
Product code for the product purchased 
from the vendor. This product code is 
consistent with the catalog from the vendor.
Unit cost
UnitCost
The cost per unit of the product 
purchased from the vendor.
Shipping cost
ShipCost
Total shipping costs.
Flat duty
FlatDuty
The flat duty rate applies to article that 
are dutiable.
Tariff
TariffAmt
The total dollar amount of a tariff 
applied to the goods shipped.
Shipping location
ShipLocation
The country in which the goods are 
shipped from.
Receiving Quality 
rating
QualityRate
This is a quality rating keyed into the 
AIS by the receiving team when they 
receive the goods. The scale is 1 = poor 
to 5 = excellent quality. The receiving 
team rates the shipment on packaging, 
quality of materials, and overall delivery.
Payment terms
PaymentTerms
The agreed-upon payment terms with 
the vendor. These terms are negotiated 
by the purchasing manager and keyed 
into the vendor master file by the 
purchasing supervisor.
Shipping terms
ShipTerms
Shipping terms–typically FOB 
destination or FOB shipping.
Payment address
PayAddress
The vendors address where payment is 
to be mailed.
Purchase order 
number
PONumber
The unique identifying number assigned 
to each purchase order issued by the 
company.
Purchase order date
PODate
The date the purchase order is issued by 
the company.
Receiving report 
number
ReceivingNumber
The unique identifying number assigned 
to each receiving report created by the 
company’s receiving group.
Receiving report date
ReceivingDate
The date the product is received by the 
company’s receiving department.
Quantity received
QtyReceived
The total quantity of items received.
Quantity purchased
QtyPurchased
The total quantity of items on the 
Purchase Order.
Invoiced quantity
QtyInvoice
The total quantity of items on the invoice, 
this amount is hand keyed into the AIS 
by the AP clerk from the manual invoice 
mailed to the company by the vendor.
Treasurer Approval
Approved
The initials of the Treasurer indicating 
their approval if the invoice was greater 
than $10,000.
--- PAGE 58 ---
Professional Application Case: Automated Transportation, Inc. (ATI)  4-57
PAC 4.1  Accounting Information Systems: Evaluate AIS Internal Controls 
Accounting Information Systems   As an information systems accountant, the owners have asked 
to you to design internal controls related to the company’s vendor payment system. Remember from 
your accounting information systems course that there are several important controls in the order-to-
pay cycle, including approval of purchases, and approval of vendor invoices. You have implemented the 
following control:
•	 The accounting clerk prepares a voucher package containing a disbursement voucher, vendor 
invoice, purchase order, and receiving document for each payment to be made.
•	 Invoices where payment exceeds $10,000 have a second level of approval, which is noted in the 
information system by the treasurer’s initials.
You want to test the operational effectiveness of this control by analyzing data captured by the accounting 
information system during this process. Assume the objective of your analysis is to understand whether 
the internal control is operating as designed. Design your data analysis strategy to address this objective. 
Be sure to document the following components:
	 1.	 What is the question your data analysis should address?
	 2.	 Using the data dictionary, what measured raw data and non-measured raw data fields should you 
request?
	 3.	 What analysis choices will you make to analyze the data? Specifically, what calculated data fields 
would you create in your analysis?
	 4.	 What are the data risks to your data analysis strategy?
	 5.	 What are the analysis risks in your strategy?
	 6.	 What controls should you include in your data and analysis strategies to minimize the risks you outlined?
PAC 4.2  Auditing: Select Large and Unusual Purchases
Data   Auditing   You are a ­second-year staff working at a public accounting firm assigned to the ATI 
engagement, which is a new engagement for the firm. Your audit senior has provided you with a trans-
action file that contains all the company’s payments to vendors for the month of January. You have been 
asked to determine if the company is accurately recording invoice information by designing a data analy-
sis strategy to select purchase transactions for further testing. You must design a data analysis strategy to 
select purchase transactions for further testing. Your senior asked you to identify transactions that may be 
outside the normal purchasing behavior. Therefore, you must perform descriptive analyses. Your senior 
provided you with this partial data ­analysis plan.
Complete the chart by identifying the risk and related controls for the data and analysis choices 
determined in the data analysis plan.
Objective and 
Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Identify  
purchase transactions  
for further testing.
Questions: Are  
there purchase  
transactions that  
may be considered  
anomalies?
Data strategy: InvoiceNo, 
InvoiceDate, QtyInvoice, 
InvoiceAmt, VendorID, 
VendorDescription
Analysis strategy: Perform 
descriptive statistics to understand 
total dollar amount and count of 
purchases made to each vendor.
Perform diagnostic statistics and 
create a scatterplot whereby the 
InvoiceDate is on the X-axis and 
the InvoiceAmount is on the Y-axis 
to identify any outlier purchases.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis: 
3. Data: 
4. Analysis: 
	 5.	 Perform descriptive statistical analysis to identify the total dollar amount and count of purchases 
made to each vendor.
	 6.	 Use the provided data set to perform the diagnostic statistical analysis to create a scatterplot where 
the InvoiceDate is on the X-axis and the InvoiceAmt is on the Y-axis to identify outlier purchases.
--- PAGE 59 ---
4-58  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
PAC 4.3  Financial Accounting: Plan to Identify High Activity Vendors
Financial Accounting   The owners of the company want to know which vendors the purchasing 
group are using and how much they are paying each to negotiate better contract terms with regular 
vendors. You are performing data analysis to identify the most used vendors. Answer each question with 
respect to your data analysis.
	 1.	 What is the question your data analysis should address?
	 2.	 Using the data dictionary, what measured raw data and non-measured raw data fields should you 
request?
	 3.	 What analysis choices will you make to analyze the data? Be specific, what calculated data fields 
would you create in your analysis?
	 4.	 What are the data risks to your data analysis strategy?
	 5.	 What are the analysis risks in your strategy?
	 6.	 What controls should you include in your analysis to minimize the risks you outlined?
PAC 4.4  Managerial Accounting: Rank Vendor Quality
Data   Managerial Accounting   Because the company is growing so fast, the owners want to be sure 
that they are partnering with the right vendors for raw materials. They have asked the receiving team 
to give each receipt a rating to document the quality of the packaging, the materials in appearance, and 
overall delivery. For each receipt the receiving group documents a quality rating in the accounting infor-
mation system. The owners have asked you to determine how the quality rating by vendor has changed 
since the beginning of the year. Your manager has designed the following partial data analysis strategy. 
Complete the chart and document the risks and related controls to your analyses.
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand the 
quality ratings of purchases.
Questions: What is the  
average quality rating by  
vendor?
What is the highest and  
lowest quality rating by  
vendor?
How has the quality rating by 
vendor changed over time?
Data strategy: VendorID, 
VendorName, ReceivingNo, 
ReceivingDate, QualityRate
Analysis strategy:
Calculate the average QualityRating 
by VendorName.
Calculate the minimum and 
maximum QualityRating by 
VendorName.
Visualize how QualityRating by 
VendorName has changed over time.
1. Data:
2. Analysis: 
3. Data:
4. Analysis: 
	 5.	 Perform the analyses suggested in the data analyses project plan.
PAC 4.5  Tax Accounting: Plan International Duty Cost Analysis
Tax Accounting   The owners want to understand the total dollar amount of customs duty they will owe 
the U.S. government for the year. They have asked you to perform descriptive analytics to understand the 
purchases from vendors located in each country. Your company makes purchases from vendors located in 
several countries, such as China, Mexico, the United States, Japan, South Africa, Israel, Greece, and Egypt. 
You and your team have designed a data analysis strategy. You have been asked to consider the risks 
and related controls in the development of that strategy. Complete the following chart.
Objective and Questions
Data and Analysis Strategies
Risks
Controls
Objective: Understand the 
purchases made from each 
country.
Questions: What dollar amount 
of purchases are made from each 
country?
How many purchases were made 
from vendors in each country?
Data strategy: ShipLocation, 
InvoiceAmt, FlatDuty, TariffAmt, 
PONumber
Analysis strategy: 
Use a pivot table to drop the 
ShipLocation into the rows and the 
sum of InvoiceAmt into values.
Use a pivot table to drop the  
ShipLocation into the rows and  
count of PONumber into values.
1. Data: 
2. Analysis: 
3. Data: 
4. Analysis: 
--- PAGE 60 ---
Le Grind Continuing Case: Design a Data Analysis Plan for Describing and Diagnosing Gross Margin Changes
4-59
Le Grind Continuing Case: Design a Data Analysis Plan for Describing and Diagnosing Gross
Margin Changes
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more details about the continuing case. 
