LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Explain how an analysis strategy is designed.
Consider these two questions when designing a data analysis strategy:
	 1.	 Can the chosen analysis strategy answer the specific objective questions?  
	 2.	 Is the measurement scale of the data appropriate for the selected analysis strategy?
Earlier in this course you learned there are four types of data analysis objectives: descriptive, 
­diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive. Each asks different questions of the data. We perform 
analyses to answer those ­questions. The specific analysis that can be performed on the data 
is influenced by the data’s measurement scales. Next, we summarize what to consider when 
designing analyses for projects with descriptive and diagnostic objectives.
Designing Analyses to Describe and Diagnose
Because understanding the phenomena captured by the data is essential, many data analysis 
projects begin with descriptive analyses. Diagnostic analytics involve many of the same anal-
yses as descriptive, but the focus is on explaining why something happened. Because many 
types of analyses can be both descriptive and diagnostic, it makes sense to discuss these two 
analysis strategies together.
The specific type of descriptive and diagnostic analysis used depends on the measure-
ment scale of the data. For example, calculating the median observation in the data requires 
using either interval or ratio measures. Illustration 4.14 shows some analysis strategies for 
descriptive and diagnostic objectives (checkmarks indicate appropriate analyses, and Xs indi-
cate analyses that are inappropriate for the measurement scale).
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  Analyses Strategies for Descriptive and Diagnostic Analytics
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Central Tendency
Mode
Median
Mean
Frequency Distributions
Both counts and %s:
Group frequency
Cumulative frequency
Relative frequency
(Continued)
--- PAGE 19 ---
4-18  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Categorical
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Data Dispersion
Minimum, maximum, range, quartiles
Variance and standard deviation
Normality, skewness, and kurtosis tests
Visualizations
Only bar and pie chart
Many other trends options
Histograms/box plots
Correlation
Scatterplots, Pearson’s R
Cross tabulation analysis
Calculations
Totals and subtotals
Percent change
Percent of total
Regression
Descriptive Analysis Strategies
Recall that accounting data are historic economic transaction and valuation data. Accoun-
tants, business managers, and regulators all want to know more about what happened and 
whether the data signals good or concerning news, so descriptive analyses are the most com-
mon analysis strategies using accounting data. It is useful for evaluating strategy performance 
because it provides more meaning and business intelligence than from just looking, for exam-
ple, at the totals reported on one year’s financial statements.
Let’s work through an example using the using the WeMakeIt Inc. accounts receivable data 
set to illustrate the explanatory power of descriptive analysis even when using categorical data. 
Recall that the objective for this analysis was to become more confident in the percentages 
used for estimating bad debts. The initial descriptive analysis results indicated a large increase 
in the number of customers with open invoices at the 2025 year end compared to the 2024 year 
end. This analysis had been designed to answer two descriptive questions:
•	Objective question 1: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the year end 
of 2024?
•	Objective question 2: How many customers had outstanding invoices at the end of 2025?
A data strategy and an analysis strategy were developed:
•	Data strategy: Use the categorical variable of CustomerNumber to identify customers 
with outstanding balances.
•	Analysis strategy: Count and compare the frequency of unique customer numbers with 
outstanding invoices at the year-end of 2024, and then repeat the analysis for the 2025 
year-end. Note that both count and frequency are analyses that can be performed on cat-
egorical data.
ILLUSTRATION 4.14  (Continued)
--- PAGE 20 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-19
ILLUSTRATION 4.15  
Outstanding Invoices by Customer 
Number 
Number of Customers
with Outstanding Invoices
at 2024 and 2025 Year-Ends
Number of
Customers
0
10
20
30
40
60
50
2024
2025
37
37
52
The results indicated that in 2024 there were 37 unique customer numbers with outstanding 
invoices, and in 2025 there were 52 unique customers numbers with outstanding invoices. 
Next, we discuss diagnostic analysis strategies.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.5: Be Careful Interpreting 
Initial Results
You might initially conclude that accounts receivable in 2025 has the potential for higher col-
lectability risk simply because there were more customers with outstanding invoices in 2025 
than in 2024. However, this initial judgment may be affected by internal assumptions and biases 
(Risks):
•	 The 2025 increase in the number of customers with outstanding balances may not be a nega-
tive result, as the company grew and added new customers in 2025.
•	 These results may motivate you to evaluate alternative explanations and perform new analyses, 
such as determining if the 2025 customer numbers with outstanding invoices at year end had 
more invoices owed in 2025 than in 2024, or if the value of their outstanding balances were high-
er in 2025, possibly signaling a cash liquidity concern This result is more closely relevant to our 
company’s accounts receivable risks of uncollectability (Alternatives).
Diagnostic Analysis Strategies
Diagnostic analysis strategies can be compared to detective work. Accountants can use these 
analysis strategies to identify and discover the most likely causes of accounting phenomena. 
While both descriptive and diagnostic analysis strategies are descriptive techniques, diagnos-
tic analysis strategies also identify what factors have caused the lower sales revenues or the 
higher costs, for example. Diagnostic strategies always require applying critical thinking skills.
Stakeholders rely on accountants across accounting practice areas to diagnose what is 
happening and explain, typically in non-accounting terms, why it is happening. For instance, 
systems accountants often use error dispersion data to identify system performance issues or 
unusual activity data that may indicate unauthorized party access.
Let’s use the WeMakeIt Inc. accounts receivable data set again, this time to illustrate diag-
nostic analysis: 
•	New objective question: Do the returning credit customers have more outstanding 
invoices at the 2025 year-end than they had outstanding at the 2024 year-end?
•	Data strategy: Once again, use the data set for the 2024 and 2025 year-end accounts 
receivable open invoices.
•	Analysis strategy: Group the data by CustomerNumber for this question.
Illustration 4.15 reports the results of this analysis.
--- PAGE 21 ---
4-20  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
To answer this question, we may choose to create a new, calculated ordinal variable (recall 
that a variable is a data item that will be used in the analysis). This variable will group credit 
customers into increasing ranges based on the number of invoices they have outstanding at 
year-end. There are some benefits to this strategy:
•	Changing a continuous variable into ordinal ranges results in meaningful groupings 
rather than a simple count of the number of invoices outstanding per customer.
•	The new ordinal variable allows a better understanding of the overall results of the num-
ber of outstanding invoices in total.
Let’s create three levels for outstanding invoices: ranges of 1-3 invoices, 4-6 invoices, and 7-9 
invoices as the new ordinal variable levels. Illustration 4.16 provides a visualization of the 
results of this analysis strategy. ( Data How To 4.2 describes how to recreate this visualization 
with a different tool.)
How To
ILLUSTRATION 4.16  Frequency 
of Customers with Outstanding 
Balances
Number of Outstanding Invoices
Number of
Customers
1–3
48
7
2
2
3
4–6
7–9
Number of Customers with Outstanding
Invoices in 2024 and 2025
0
20
40
60
2024
2025
27
The results of this second analysis show that the number of customers with 4-6 and 7-9 
­outstanding invoices had decreased in 2025 compared to 2024. However, there are almost 
twice as many customers with 1-3 past due invoices in 2025 compared to 2024. These results 
are mixed news for concerns about future accounts receivable collectability risks.
This surprise finding is a good reminder about the importance of critical thinking and 
deliberation about the initial analysis results. Thinking critically when interpreting anal-
ysis results involves evaluating both the analysis strategies performed and not performed. 
Skeptically questioning data analysis strategies can provide valuable insights, as this final 
analysis did.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.6: Controls for Risks 
to Analysis Strategies
Depending on the objective of the project, analysis strategies can involve a diverse mix of vari-
ables with different sources and measurement scales. Simply adding variables and complexi-
ties to analysis choices without justification can lead to information overload, which can impair 
your judgement. For example, sales forecasts might involve fewer variables in industries such 
as agriculture, as food demand is more stable, than for airlines, as travel is more discretionary. 
Professional risk-reducing habits include (Risks):
•	 Keeping analysis as simple as possible by including the fewest yet most relevant variables.
•	 Documenting each step, especially the benefits and drawbacks of each choice as you develop, 
evaluate, and choose an analysis strategy (Alternatives).
The process for analyzing WeMakeIt, Inc.’s accounts receivable, whether descriptive or diag-
nostic, involves an approach that can be used for most analysis strategies in accounting:
•	Start with a clear objective and specific questions that should be answered.
--- PAGE 22 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-21
•	Develop data alternatives, evaluate each on factors related to the objective, and select the 
best data strategy. Filter the data set down to the variables and ranges of interest necessary 
for the objective.
•	The best analysis strategies typically create new calculated within-row variables necessary 
for the analysis. These new calculated variables can be categorical groupings, ordinal rank-
ings, interval measures, and ratio variables. Remember that relevant groupings can make 
it easier to interpret results.
•	Calculate any vertical analysis measures necessary, such as totals, frequencies, averages, 
and measures of dispersion across the rows in the data set.
•	Finally, the analysis variables can be correlated or sliced by dimension variables to add 
insights from disaggregating the vertical measure total.
Descriptive and diagnostic analyses help to better understand what happened and why it 
­happened. What if the objective is to predict a future outcome or determine what strategies 
might achieve a specific outcome? In those cases, we need to use predictive or prescriptive 
analyses, which are explained next.
Designing Analyses to Predict and Prescribe
Predictive analysis strategies use historical data to create models that estimate a future value 
or outcome. Prescriptive analysis strategies, on the other hand, help determine which option 
is most likely to produce the best outcome given the objective. Predictive and prescriptive 
analysis strategies can determine the best use of resources, improve performance, anticipate 
market reactions and movements, and avoid process breakdowns:
•	Accountants commonly use these analysis strategies to evaluate tax planning options, 
operational and marketing strategy options, financing options, investment options, and 
exit strategy options.
•	Industries with these analysis objectives include lending institutions that want to avoid 
bad credit decisions and insurance companies that must anticipate natural disasters and 
disease onset so they can adjust business models before crises that cause their businesses 
to suffer happen.
Illustration 4.17 summarizes the most common predictive and prescriptive analysis strat-
egies used by accountants that do not involve advanced technology tools. The green check-
marks indicate appropriate analyses, and the red x’s indicate inappropriate analyses. As the 
illustration shows, there are not many predictive or prescriptive models for categorical and 
ordinal scale variables unless they are used in models in which interval or ratio scale variables 
are desired for the prediction.
ILLUSTRATION 4.17  Analyses Strategies for Predictive and Prescriptive  
Analytics
Trendlines
Regression analysis (linear)
Optimization models
What-if analyses
Ratio
Categorical
Potential Analyses
Data Measurement Scale
Ordinal
Interval
= inappropriate analysis for the scale
Both predictive and prescriptive analysis strategies often use statistics and sophisticated 
modeling techniques for their algorithms:
•	Common tools for this include statistical regression, time series analyses, process min-
ing and mapping, text analysis, artificial intelligence models, data mining, mathematical 
modeling, complex simulations, and what-if sensitivity analysis modeling.
•	These models train themselves by leveraging patterns, relationships, and structures 
within the existing data to accurately anticipate future conditions and outcomes.
--- PAGE 23 ---
4-22
CHAPTER 4 Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
 The key to designing predictive or prescriptive strategies is to select data that will have the best 
potential to inform the predictive or prescriptive objective questions:
• If the goal is to predict next year’s production equipment maintenance expense, data 
that  helps explain the expected amount or increases or decreases in maintenance 
expenses are necessary. In other words, what variables drive changes in maintenance 
expense? Once those variables are identified, the related data can be selected and 
prepared for analysis.
• If we believe production level impacts maintenance expense, then include a data variable 
for the number of products produced, a measure of the most common levels of produc-
tion, or a measure of whether production is expected to increase or decrease from current 
levels. 
 Suppose the WeMakeIt’s auditors are testing the assumptions used to create the balance in the
the company’s allowance for doubtful accounts. The auditors developed a model that included 
three variables that might impact whether the invoices would be collected on time. The model 
predicts how many days outstanding an invoice may be based on the invoice amount, if they 
are a new (1) or existing customer (0), and the credit period allowed on their invoice. The 
result of the regression model is provided in  Illustration 4.18 . 
 ILLUSTRATION 4.18  Prediction Model for Accounts Receivable Days Outstanding
Multiple R
R Square
Adjusted R Square
Standard Error
Observations
ANOVA
0.825790307
0.681929631
0.681542056
3.549920129
2466
df
SS
MS
F
66518.36434
31025.95885
Regression
Residual
Total
3
2462
2465
97544.3232
22172.78811
12.60193292
1759.475173
0.0000
0.670515711
0.000903172
Intercept
InvoiceAmount
New or Existing Customer
Credit Period in Days
−7.961650225
0.000829906
1.535043063
0.189912705
8.082887691
−11.87392047
0.918879698
9.81036E-16
0.395420024
0.006452145
61.28504622
0.000
0.358248513
1.16228E-31
Significance F
Coeﬀicients
Standard Error
t Stat
P-value
Regression Statistics
 This model reveals that these variables (invoice amount, new or existing customer, and credit 
period) explain about 68% of the change in days outstanding for a customer (adjusted R-square). 
The model is significant with a Significance F of less than 0.05. The negative intercept corrects 
the model’s predictions by almost 8 days because customers rarely pay within the first week 
when they are offered an interest free period of time to pay their invoices. The significance of 
the intercept indicates that the mere existence of a credit period is a variable that impacts the 
number of days customers take to pay their invoices. With this model, the auditors can now
predict that a new customer with a $900 invoice and 60 days to settle will take about 16.5 days 
to make their payment:
−7.9617 +  $ 900  ( 0.0008 ) +  1 ( 1.5350 ) +  60 ( 0.3954 ) =  16.48  days 
 Analysis Strategy Risks and Suggested Controls
 The last two steps of a data analysis plan are to consider risks inherent to the data and analysis 
strategies and to put in place controls to reduce those risks.  Illustration 4.19 captures the 
most common risks that accountants face when analyzing data. 
--- PAGE 24 ---
4.3  What Should We Consider When Selecting an Analysis?   4-23
ILLUSTRATION 4.19  Common Analysis Risks and Recommended Controls 
Analysis
Risk
Control
The analysis is not appropriate for the variable’s
measurement scales.
The sample size is too small to allow for
accurate inferences.
Insuﬀiciently trained prediction and
classification models.
The sample is not representative.
Confounding variables are interfering with the
reliability of the information models.
The omission of relevant variables, or variables that
are unknown and not controlled for, resulting in less
reliable modeling.
Uncorrected and uncontrolled dirty data issues, such
as errors, empty fields, outlier data points, and data from
diﬀerent levels of quality sources.
Insuﬀicient knowledge about or experience in performing
the analysis strategy or interpreting the results.
Poorly made or misleading visualizations.
Failing to address the underlying uncertainties in
the context.
Review whether the analysis is appropriate for variables’
measure scales. Change analysis strategy if needed.
Test the reasonableness of sample with descriptive
analyses.
Perform the analysis with and without the confounding
variable to test for explanatory power diﬀerences.
Add available proxies for the missing variables to see if
the model’s explanatory power increases.
Properly prepare the data before starting the analysis.
(Data preparation is explained in the next chapter.)
Acquire proper training or work with a team that has
more collective knowledge.
Perform descriptive analyses to compare and augment
the visualization. Use visualization best practices.
Perform sensitivity analysis on all assumptions used
in the analysis decisions.
Gather more data to meet the model’s minimum data
points and assumptions, or select data analyses that do
not require large samples.
Include more data to train the models and fully verify
their accuracy before using them on the test data.
It is critical to consider these risks during analysis strategy planning and to add controls to 
help mitigate them. Without those controls we risk preparing, interpreting, and reporting 
incorrect analyses results, possibly causing ourselves or our stakeholders to make harmful 
decisions. Now that we have worked through the process of choosing the best data and analy-
sis strategies, let’s examine how accountants do this in professional practice.
Financial Accounting   Tremendous Toys has implemented a database to capture inventoriable 
costs from their production each week. Data from the following data fields have been extracted, not-
ing each field’s data type and measurement scale.
Field Name
Field Type
Field Measurement Scale
ProductionRunNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
ProductionRunDate
Non-measured raw data
Interval
NumberOfToysinRun
Measured raw data
Ratio
ToyIDNumber
Non-measured raw data
Categorical (Nominal)
DirectMaterialsUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
DirectLaborUsed
Measured raw data
Ratio
OverheadCostApplied
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalRunCost
Calculated data
Ratio
TotalUnitCost
Calculated data
Ratio
Apply It 4.3
Create a Predictive 
Data Analysis 
Project Plan
--- PAGE 25 ---
4-24  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Using this production data, as well as the sales data for how many toys of each type were sold each 
month for the last three years, create a predictive data analysis project plan that will estimate Tremen-
dous Toy’s year-end inventory valuation at the end of the next fiscal year. Your project plan should 
address the following:
	 1.	Project objective and specific questions
	 2.	Data strategy
	 3.	Analysis strategy
	 4.	Risks in data and analysis strategies 
	 5.	Controls for data and analysis strategies 
SOLUTION
	 1.	Project objective
	
	 Specific questions
•	 Accurately predict the next year-end’s inventory value.
•	 How many units are predicted to be in inventory at the 
next year end? What is the predicted unit cost for each toy 
type at the end of next year?
	 2.	Data strategy
•	 Data from the last three years of Tremendous Toys’ pro-
duction records will be extracted and prepared for anal-
ysis regarding materials costs, labor costs, and overhead 
charges. 
•	 The sales units data by toy type for the last three years will 
be extracted, cleaned for missing, duplicate, and outlier 
data errors, and aggregated by month. This results in 36 
data points for the monthly unit sales of each toy type.
•	 A calculated variable for average monthly cost for each toy 
type will need to be created using the NumberofToysin-
Run and TotalRunCost fields. First, this data must be 
aggregated by month. Then, for each toy in each month, 
the total monthly production cost should be divided by 
the total number of toys produced to calculate the average 
toy cost per month for each toy type. The result will be 
36 data points for the monthly average cost for each type 
of toy.
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 The December sales in units can be estimated by running 
a regression on each month’s unit sales. 
•	 A calculated variable must be created for each month’s 
ending inventory units for each toy type, resulting in 36 
data points for each toy. This variable’s formula is: begin-
ning inventory units + monthly toys produced − monthly 
units sold. (You can assume that this business started 
three years ago with no beginning inventory.)
•	 The December year-end ending inventory in units can be 
estimated by running a regression on the monthly ending 
inventory units for each toy type. 
•	 The December year-end average cost per toy can be esti-
mated by running a regression on the average monthly 
costs per toy. 
•	 To calculate the total December ending inventory val-
uation, the December ending inventory units for each 
toy should be multiplied by its corresponding estimated 
December average cost. Then these total costs per toy must 
be added for the total December year end inventory value. 
(Continued)
--- PAGE 26 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-25
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 There may be missing, duplicated, or erroneous data in 
the fields selected for analysis.
•	 Costs may have changed over the three years due to sea-
sonality, changes in vendors, and inflation. 
•	 Calculations may contain errors.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Perform data cleaning tests to find and correct missing 
data, duplicates, and errors that result in outlier data 
points. 
•	 Compare the unit cost and sales per month to determine 
if an inflation factor, seasonality, or other changes have 
occurred. If data shifts are noticed, their cause and perma-
nence should be verified by speaking with the employees 
who would know the answers. 
•	 Each of the calculations performed should be verified, as 
well as the averaging calculations.
•	 Regression analyses can be verified by making visual-
izations of the three years of monthly data points and 
visually inspected for agreement with the regression 
estimations.
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies 
Differ Across Practice Areas?
