LEARNING OBJECTIVE ❹
Summarize data and analyses strategies in professional practice areas.
As the last step of the data analysis planning stage, accounting professionals across practice 
areas design data and analysis strategies based on their project objectives. Here, we offer 
examples of common data and analytics strategies for the accounting information systems 
(AIS), auditing, financial accounting, managerial accounting, and tax accounting professional 
practice areas.
Accounting Information Systems
Because a company’s accounting information system is involved in planning, executing, 
controlling, and reporting the business’ operations, data analysis projects in this area often 
involve interdisciplinary data and knowledge. These project objectives can range in scope 
from impacting just one or two employees to involving most of the organization. All four 
types of analytics objectives (descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive) are com-
monly used.
--- PAGE 27 ---
4-26  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
ILLUSTRATION 4.20  Number of Service Requests Each Month
Number of Service Requests
Service 
Requests
Months
0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
20
40
60
80
120
140
160
180
100
99
153
118
100
46
98
98
72
92
72
153
72
92
72
77
64
AIS data analyses projects may also choose data strategies which use quantitative interval and 
ratio data:
•	Costs such as equipment and software installations and updates, and IT staff labor.
•	Budget variances for any of these costs.
It is important to select data that captures the AIS system’s performance, vulnerabilities, and 
errors. For example, to analyze performance we could analyze the number of spam emails 
(ratio data) before and after investment in a new firewall.
Accountants designing analysis strategies for AIS projects are focused on increasing com-
petitive advantage and improving the organization’s operations. They often use statistics to 
understand which element of the accounting system they should focus on. The mathemat-
ical formality of statistical tools can help to persuade management to make the necessary 
investments.
There are risks involved with AIS data choice and analysis choices. Some common 
strategic and critical risks and suggested controls for AIS data and analysis are listed in 
Illustration 4.21.
The data analyzed in these projects can include a variety of IT operational data with dif-
ferent levels of data integrity and control documentation. More traditional accounting data 
are often analyzed with qualitative categorical and ordinal data:
•	Counts of help tickets and incidents.
•	Error counts and delay times.
•	Login issues.
•	System satisfaction and IT service satisfaction.
For example, Illustration 4.20 is an example of a visualization of the number of monthly 
service requests related to the accounting information system of a company. The objective was 
to identify how many and which months experienced more than the IT staff’s capacity of 90 
service requests.
--- PAGE 28 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-27
ILLUSTRATION 4.21  Risks and Controls for AIS Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Human behavior is not captured.
• Data manipulation from unauthorized
   access or untrained employees.
• Strong logs and segregation of duties in IT.
• Eﬀective back ups and graceful degradation.
• Clear procedures.
• Thorough data cleaning and triangulation to
   verify data capture.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data and change management controls.
• Data retention and destruction policies.
• Strong access controls.
• Loss of data due to security breaches,
   ransomware, or natural disasters.
• Diﬀiculties capturing high velocity data.
• Diﬀiculties measuring interdepartmental
   dependencies on process sofware.
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Errors in variable transformations.
• Verifying analysis steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations.
• Performing sensitivity analyses for critical results.
• Data availability windows are too short to
   capture more strategic trends and issues.
• Creating eﬀective visualizations and explanations.
Auditing
Auditors’ historic resistance to change, due to high litigation risks and Public Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) review of audit processes, is disappearing as new technologies help 
them perform higher-quality, lower-risk, and more efficient audits. Audit firms are increas-
ingly investing in technology and new ways to use it. They are reorganizing to offer new ser-
vices to provide more business intelligence and economic value to their clients.
Auditors use statistics to determine risks to account balances and unusual transactions, 
especially in journal entries that involve estimates and assumptions. They commonly work 
with different kinds of data sources, from process documentation, journal entries, general 
and subsidiary ledgers, trial balances, to financial ratios. Auditors use analysis strategies for:
•	Continuous auditing modules to test large data populations rather than testing samples 
with inference risks.
•	Automated identification of dirty data, unusual transactions, and pattern anomalies to 
better reduce audit risk and fraud risks.
•	Testing entire transaction cycles’ internal controls with process mining and tracing pur-
chasing to payment flows, P-cards (purchasing credit cards) usage and payroll documen-
tation. Testing the revenue cycle from order to collection.
•	Using robotic process automation (RPA) to remove the human (and often inconsistent) 
element of repetitive audit tasks, freeing auditors to focus on areas that require thought-
ful critical thinking and judgments. (RPA applications and benefits to accountants are 
explained in the chapter that covers data and analysis developments in accounting.)
•	Testing hypotheses about inventory and fixed assets with sampling, statistical tests, and 
inferences for the population of these assets.
--- PAGE 29 ---
4-28  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.22 is an example of auditors using a process mining analysis strategy to learn 
whether all purchases followed the correct process from requisition to the recording of the 
invoice for the purchase. The visualization indicates that more than expected purchases 
(308 purchases) skip the authorized purchase requisition process step as well as the autho-
rized order confirmation, goods receipt, and vendor invoice steps. These deviations from the 
authorized process are concerning to an auditor. The blue boxes indicate where the process is 
letting in purchase orders without purchase requisitions and letting out purchase orders with-
out the subsequent required steps. An auditor will then want to follow-up on these exceptions 
to the authorized process.
ILLUSTRATION 4.22  Process Mining Results for Purchases 
Analysis
Process Start
8,864
Create Purchase Requisition Item
8,556
Create Purchase Order Item
8,864
Print and Send Purchase Order (Paper)
8,864
Receive Order Confirmation
8,556
Record Goods Receipt
8,556
3,556
3,556
Vendor creates Invoice
8,556
Record Invoice Receipt
8,556
Process End
8,864
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
3,556
8,864
3,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,556
8,864
8,556
5,308
308
5,308
308
--- PAGE 30 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-29
Regardless of the data and analysis strategies used, auditors must identify the risks and con-
trols necessary to assure they can rely on the results of their analyses (Illustration 4.23).
ILLUSTRATION 4.23  Risks and Controls for Auditing Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing data.
• Dirty data.
• Strong audit trail tests of internal controls for
   data entry, storage, processing, and reporting.
• Testing authorization and access controls.
• Fake transaction data.
• Errors in assumptions.
• Verification of all audit steps and calculations.
• Errors in calculations and conclusions.
• Checks on authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
Financial Accounting
Financial accountants are primarily responsible for capturing, recording, processing, storing, 
and reporting accounting information. Accuracy, thoroughness, and documentation are essen-
tial. The accounting data they use for analyses are both guided and restrained by accounting 
regulations and government agency compliance. Due to the measurement scales of the vari-
ables they need for analysis, financial accountants may have to transform data depending on 
their objective questions. These data most often include categorical, interval, and ratio data.
The purpose of a data analysis strategy might be describing and diagnosing based on cor-
responding financial accounting rules and regulations:
•	Nature, timing, and authorization of transactions (and diagnose issues) charged to each 
account.
•	Internal control effectiveness and weaknesses.
•	The completeness and reasonableness of adjusting entries at the end of the period.
Financial accountants also use analysis strategies designed for their predictive and prescrip-
tive objectives regarding financial outcomes for managers and board members. One example 
is estimating additional information to be presented along with their financial statements, 
such as:
•	Ranking alternative capital sources and costs of capital in terms of favorability.
•	Future net income and cash flows from operations, investing, and financing activities.
•	Impacts of new strategies on the financial statement.
•	Expected future costs associated with contingent liabilities, pension costs, new business 
units or the discontinuation of business units.
Financial accountants use statistics to identify opportunities and problems with profitability, 
liquidity, and business valuation. They analyze categorical industry codes from their client’s 
categorical groups of held to maturity, trading, and available for sale investment assets to 
ensure desired diversification risks and holding strategies.
--- PAGE 31 ---
4-30  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.24 is a waterfall chart that shows the analysis results for a project with the 
objective to better understand the monthly net cash flows for an organization by month. A water-
fall chart is a useful visualization to show the positive and negative components of a change.
ILLUSTRATION 4.24  Net Cash Flow Visualization
$8,000
$7,000
$6,000
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total
Net Cash Flows
$2,600
$2,350
$(900)
$(1,400)
$(700)
$800
$2,400
$(500)
$(800)
$2,350
$1,300
$(2,900)
$4,600
Increase
Decrease
This waterfall visualization shows the change in cashflow for each month. For instance, in 
February cashflow increased by $2,350 but then decreased by $900 in March. The net of all 
the monthly changes agrees to the total. Like other accountants, financial accountants must 
identify potential risks in their data and analysis strategies (Illustration 4.25).
ILLUSTRATION 4.25  Risks and Controls for Financial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
Risks
Controls
• Missing operational and adjusting entries.
• Dirty data.
• Strong accounting cycle steps.
• Strong internal controls for data entry,
  storage, processing, and reporting.
• Fake transaction data.
• Authorization and access controls.
• Testing for and correcting missing,
  duplicate, and outlier data.
• Incorrect valuation.
• Incorrect account.
• Incorrect time period.
• Missing data.
• Calculation errors.
• Verifying all cycle steps and calculations.
• Biases and self-interests.
• Checking authentication and approvals.
• Sensitivity analysis for critical results.
• Incorrect calculations.
• Verify applicable GAAP guidance.
• Not following GAAP analysis guidance.
Managerial Accounting
Managerial accountants add value to their organization with different data analysis strategies. 
The purpose of most managerial accounting data analyses is to improve planning, operational 
control, and decision-making to support an organization’s mission and strategies. This type 
of data analysis is valuable for improving the selection, execution, and evaluation of organi-
zational strategy. These kinds of analyses can also lead to decisions that give employees more 
access to information, which improves performance and, eventually, organizational culture 
and operations.
--- PAGE 32 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-31
Managerial accountants prepare analysis strategies, both for routine and ad hoc (one-time) 
objectives for each functional area of their organization. These strategies use data across mea-
surement scales to describe, diagnose, predict, and prescribe strategy impacts:
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business organization, policy and process will 
increase efficiencies, for example, to reduce non-value-added steps and delays.
•	Identifying areas where innovation in business partnerships, operations, and internal 
controls will increase effectiveness.
•	Increasing competitive advantage through many new business intelligence opportunities.
•	Improving compliance with all legal and regulatory regulations.
Managerial accountants may perform data analysis to determine the potential business pro-
cess and internal control benefits of automating the purchase requisition to vendor invoice 
process (see Illustration 4.22). Automation could force all departments to go through the 
authorized business process rather than going around it. Identifying risks to the data and anal-
yses used in managerial accounting is important to ensure analysis results are accurate and 
reliable ­(Illustration 4.26). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.7: Use Multiple Disciplines 
in Managerial Accounting
The knowledge base needed by managerial accountants is broad, involving multiple disciplines. 
For example, to reduce factory operating costs, managerial accountants must understand the 
engineering of their production machines and know how to create reliable statistical models 
for future production (Knowledge):
•	 Accounting and economic concepts
•	 Organizational behavior
•	 Operations management
•	 Technology tools
•	 Quantitative analyses disciplines
ILLUSTRATION 4.26  Risks and Controls for Managerial Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Analysis
Data
• Dirty data.
• Missing data.
• Independent verification.
• Segregation of duties.
• Verify authorization.
• Considering the purpose when
  making data choices.
• Irrelevant data.
• Sound personnel governance.
• Errors in calculations.
• Verifying all steps and calculations.
• Errors in attributions.
• Biases and self-interests.
Risks
Control Choices
Tax Accounting
Thanks to data analytics, tax accountants have more information for their tax planning and 
compliance services, which improves their judgments and how they document defend their 
--- PAGE 33 ---
4-32  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
positions to both clients and regulators. Recent surveys show that over 58% of tax accountants 
are using data and analytics strategies for many areas of their professional practice1, including:
•	Sales and use taxes and local taxes (SALT).
•	Value added taxes (VAT).
•	Goods and services taxes (GST).
•	Customs duties.
•	Transfer pricing and intercompany transactions.
•	Tax compliance.
•	Tax provisions.
Perhaps the biggest effect of data analysis strategies on tax practice is the movement away from a 
dependency on historic data and toward a forward-looking, value-adding service perspective by 
using predicting and prescribing analytics strategies. Examples of these predictive and prescrip-
tive analytics include using complex data modeling to evaluate decision and position alterna-
tives, which improves the value and accuracy of advice. Illustration 4.27 is a live dashboard that 
shows current year medical expenses compared to the level needed for itemized deductions for 
five of their individual clients. This would help the tax accountant provide advice to these clients.
1International Tax Review (2019). Preparing for the future of tax. https://www.internationaltaxreview.com/
article/2a6a41udxe4e2kuc8zoqo/preparing-for-the-future-of-tax (accessed 13 July 2022). 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.8: Think Critically in  
Tax Accounting
•	 Tax accountants consider their clients, tax authorities, and their tax firm partners when they 
plan different data analyses. Each of these stakeholders may have different objectives and 
priorities. For example, clients may prioritize minimizing their tax obligations, so that would 
be the objective of your tax planning services (Stakeholders).
•	 Strong research and analysis skills are necessary, such as when performing tax research, devel-
oping tax strategies, and estimating tax liabilities. For example, state laws are different than the 
national and international law for every type of tax category (Knowledge).
•	 Clients, both individuals and organizations, may have incentives to omit taxable revenues and 
include irrelevant and inappropriate expenses. These data risks should be controlled, perhaps 
with interview questions as well as verifying the records provided through indirect tests of 
reasonableness (Risks).
Another example is sophisticated querying of clients’ accounting data to better identify oppor-
tunities, such as when to buy or sell assets, and understanding the operational decisions driv-
ing tax liabilities.
$(25,000) $(20,000) $(15,000) $(10,000)
$(5,000)
$-
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
Client A
Client B
Client C
Client D
Client E
Medical Expenses Excess (Deficit)
for Itemized Deduction
ILLUSTRATION 4.27  Medical 
Expenses Itemized Deduction 
Threshold Assessment by Client
--- PAGE 34 ---
4.4  How Do Data and Analysis Strategies Differ Across Practice Areas?  4-33
Analysis
Data
Risks
Control Choices
• Dirty data and outliers.
• Missing data.
• Implement backups.
• Strong audit trails.
• Data retention and
  destruction policies.
• Data authenticity and dirty
   data verification and correction.
• Tax management controls.
• Errors in data evaluations and tests.
• Verification of all tax rules’
   liability steps and calculations.
• Sensitivity analysis for
   critical results.
• Errors in calculations and forms.
• Eﬀective visualizations
   and explanations.
• Lack of tax code knowledge.
ILLUSTRATION 4.28  Risks and Controls for Tax Accounting Data and Analysis Strategies
Apply It 4.4
Match Strategies 
with Professional 
Practice Areas
For each of the following data and analyses objectives:
1.	 Identify the data measurement scale that would be utilized.
2.	 Identify one practice area that is likely to perform that analysis.
Some of the options have more than one correct answer for both (1) and (2), but only enter one correct 
answer for each.
Data Measurement Scales: categorical, ordinal, interval, ratio
Practice Areas: Accounting information systems, Auditing, Financial accounting, Managerial 
accounting, Tax accounting
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end open 
invoices on days outstanding.
Predicting cost savings and productivity increases 
from new AIS investments.
Creating dollar value stratified sampling plans 
for investment asset accounts.
Evaluating web server security incidents by type 
of incident.
Prescribing product revenue increases by product 
from marketing campaigns.
Predicting future cash flows from operations.
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Identifying risks and assuring that proper controls are in place to mitigate risks are also critical 
(Illustration 4.28).
--- PAGE 35 ---
4-34  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
SOLUTION
Objective
Measurement Scale
Practice Area
Aging of accounts receivable’s year-end 
open invoices on days outstanding.
Interval
Financial and 
managerial 
accounting
Predicting cost savings and productivity 
increases from new AIS investments.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Creating dollar value stratified sampling 
plans for investment asset accounts.
Interval
Auditing
Evaluating web server security incidents by 
type of incident.
Categorical
Accounting 
information 
systems
Prescribing product revenue increases by 
product from marketing campaigns.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Predicting future cash flows from 
operations.
Ratio
Managerial 
accounting
Calculating before and after process 
improvements from system investments.
Interval
Accounting 
Information 
systems
Testing different tax planning strategies by 
evaluating future cash savings.
Ratio
Tax accounting
Estimating inventory counts at year-end by 
sampling a few of the stores and making 
population inferences.
Ratio
Auditing
Testing approvals and documentation for 
transaction authorization.
Categorical
Financial 
accounting
