Multiple Choice Questions  4-45
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Which of these is not an objective of data analysis strategies?
a.	 Collecting data.
b.	 Describing data.
c.	 Diagnosing data.
d.	 Predicting a future value of data.
e.	 Prescribing the impact of a particular strategy on the future 
value of the data.
2.  (LO 1)  Diagnosing objectives in data analysis strategies involve 
which of the following?
a.	 Looking for complete independence of variables.
b.	 Looking for causality in regression variables.
c.	 Looking for where to place the blame for bad operational 
results.
d.	 Looking for associations between data variables.
e.	 Predicting what future outcomes will be in the data.
3.  (LO 1)  The components of an effective data analysis strategy plan 
consider each of the following except for
a.	 analysis controls.
b.	 analysis risks.
c.	 analysis objectives.
d.	 analysis complexity.
4.  (LO 1)  Which of the following specific questions depicts a descrip-
tive analysis objective for accounts receivable balance at year-end?
a.	 How many invoices from the current year were collected 
during the year?
b.	 What was the total of all sales revenues, cash and credit sales, 
for the year?
c.	 How many salespersons were employed in New York City this 
year?
d.	 What is the average days in inventory for each of your product 
lines?
e.	 How many of the open invoices at the end of the year are past 
due?
5.  (LO 1)  You are asked to perform an analysis predicting the accounts 
payable balance at the year-end. Which of the following data sources 
are best to analyze for this objective?
a.	 A list of authorized new vendors for the year.
b.	 Open vendor invoices that refer to purchases already received.
c.	 A list of checks paid to accounts payable vendors during the 
year.
d.	 A list of purchase orders issued during the month of December.
e.	 None of these data resources are useful to predict the accounts 
payable year-end balance.
6.  (LO 1)  Assume you are asked to estimate the amount of uncollectible 
receivables at year-end. Which of the following is not an analysis risk to 
consider when estimating accounts receivable bad debts at year-end?
a.	 The number of full-time sales employees is reported 
inaccurately.
b.	 The calculation of days outstanding is inaccurate.
c.	 The company changed collection policies for certain 
customers.
d.	 There are new customers who are not included in the analysis 
of aged receivables.
e.	 There are mathematical errors in the summation of 
receivables.
7.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is an appropriate response to the 
data risk that the sample selected for analysis is inappropriate?
a.	 Add missing variables to see explanatory power changes.
b.	 Test a sample distribution form for statistical test assumptions.
c.	 Verify the representativeness of your sample.
d.	 Explain the rule used for outlier removal.
e.	 Know your outlier data point.
8.  (LO 1)  Critically thinking through the risks to a data analysis strat-
egy during planning will help avoid
a.	 data selection biases.
b.	 judgment errors from lack of experience.
c.	 interpretation errors from dirty data sets.
d.	 incorrect applications of statistical tests.
e.	 All of the these are possible costs from not considering the 
risks to data analyses choices.
9.  (LO 1)  A data analyses strategy is more likely to be successful if 
you critically think through
a.	 the analysis performed by your competitors.
b.	 the results you want to achieve.
c.	 the data that will best inform your questions.
d.	 your objectives for the analysis.
e.	 None of these help you perform better data analyses strategy 
planning.
10.  (LO 2)  Which of the following refers to the content of a data set’s 
row?
a.	 Data field.
b.	 Attribute.
c.	 Single occurrence of the data record.
d.	 All these define a row of data in a dataset.
11.  (LO 2)  Which of the following could refer to the name of a col-
umn in a sales invoices data set?
a.	 Invoice 3570.
b.	 Customers in Orlando, Florida.
c.	 CustomerState.
d.	 BankStatementDate.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
--- PAGE 47 ---
4-46  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
12.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is an example of knowledge you 
might need to acquire for data analysis strategy planning?
a.	 The analysis is appropriate for your data measurement scales.
b.	 An understanding of your biases.
c.	 Identifying the key stakeholders.
d.	 Analysis resources that are available for your compensation.
e.	 Compensation correlation with results.
13.  (LO 2)  Which of the following is not a data measure scale that 
can be used in designing your data analysis strategy?
a.	 Optimal data
b.	 Ordinal data
c.	 Interval data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 All of these are data measure scales.
14.  (LO 2)  Which of the following data measure scales allows for 
meaningful multiplication of data points?
a.	 Interval data
b.	 Categorical data
c.	 Ordinal data
d.	 Ratio data
e.	 Group data
15.  (LO 3)  Descriptive analyses that include median central ten-
dency measures are appropriate for which data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical 
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All these measurement scales support the median central ten-
dency measure.
16.  (LO 3)  Diagnostic analyses that include data dispersion measures 
such as variance and standard deviation are appropriate for which 
data measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for variance analysis.
17.  (LO 3)  Bar chart visualizations are appropriate for data with 
which measurement scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Ratio
d.	 Nominal
e.	 All measurement scales are appropriate for bar charts.
18.  (LO 3)  Which of the following objective questions reflects a diag-
nostic purpose for accounts receivable year-end balance?
a.	 How many outstanding invoices are there in the year-end 
accounts receivable balance?
b.	 What is the value of the year-end accounts receivable balance?
c.	 Are new customers causing the increase in outstanding 
invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance com-
pared to last year?
d.	 What is the median value for outstanding invoices in the year-
end accounts receivable balance?
e.	 What is the invoice that has been outstanding the longest 
period of time in the year-end accounts receivable balance?
19.  (LO 3)  Predictive and prescriptive analyses that include creating 
trendline visualizations are appropriate for which data measurement 
scale?
a.	 Categorical
b.	 Ordinal
c.	 Nominal
d.	 Interval
e.	 All of these measurement scales support using trendline 
visualizations. 
20.  (LO 2, LO 3)  Which of these analysis strategies involve categori-
cal and ratio data measurement scales?
a.	 Reconciliations of subsidiary ledger balances to the general 
ledger balance.
b.	 Depreciation schedules for all real estate assets.
c.	 Which types of capital sourcing have the highest cost of 
capital.
d.	 Changes to the tax rates applicable to their organization.
21.  (LO 4)  Managerial accountants would most likely plan data anal-
yses when which of the following occur?
a.	 Changes to the tax rates.
b.	 Elimination of the financial statement footnote disclosure 
requirements.
c.	 Changes to Securities and Exchange Commission website.
d.	 Changes to their organization’s performance.
22.  (LO 4)  AIS accountants would most likely design a data analysis 
strategy for which of the following opportunities? 
a.	 New technologies that can provide cost savings for opera-
tional processes.
b.	 New customers in the marketplace.
c.	 Turnover in the regulatory body leadership.
d.	 Changes to the footnote disclosures required by generally 
accepted accounting rules.
e.	 Changes in tax rules.
23.  (LO 4)  Auditors plan data analyses strategies for which of the fol-
lowing situations?
a.	 Evaluating the effectiveness of internal controls in their cli-
ent’s accounting system.
b.	 Evaluating the representativeness of an account balance on 
their client’s balance sheet or income statement.
c.	 Considering the risk involved in providing an audit opinion 
for a client.
d.	 Investigating whether a client’s assumptions for recording 
their lease liabilities is consistent with other companies in 
their industry.
e.	 All of these are examples of situations where auditors plan 
their data analysis strategies.
24.  (LO 4)  Financial accountants would most likely plan data analy-
ses strategies for which of the following?
a.	 Changes to the management team.
b.	 New competitors in the marketplace.
--- PAGE 48 ---
