--- PAGE 1 ---
4-0
 C H A PT E R  4 
 Planning Data and 
Analysis Strategies 
 Chapter Preview 
 Armed with an understanding of the motivations and objectives for the data analysis project 
and after formulating the necessary objective questions, it is time for the final step in the plan-
ning stage–designing the data and analysis strategies. You will soon be expected to apply your 
knowledge, common sense, and problem-solving skills to design a variety of accounting, audit, 
and tax related data and analyses strategies. This chapter will help you develop the skills neces-
sary to create effective data analysis project plans.
Analyze
Plan
Report
M
O
S
A
I
C
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Understand the
reason for the
data analytics
Verify the process
and the results
Explain the results
and their
implications
1. Prepare data
2. Build information
     models
    
3. Explore data
Determine the
goal and specific
questions the
analysis will
answer
Design the data
and analysis
strategy
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 1
 Professional Insight: Why Should You Plan Data and Analysis 
Strategies? 
 Taylor was excited to begin her career in auditing after interning at a Big Four accounting firm 
during the last busy season. 
 My audit team had me design my own data and analysis strategies and document each 
step I performed. While I lacked confidence at first, I felt very supported. I learned so 
much, even when I made mistakes and had to pivot my strategies. 
I was more successful when I understood the motivation for and the objective 
of my tasks. I was able to formulate better questions, which resulted in better 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter Roadmap  4-1
data choices. The measurement scales of my selected data also pointed me 
toward the appropriate analyses.
My first task was a descriptive analysis. I had to determine if the year-end accounts 
receivable subsidiary ledger and general ledger balances reconciled. After checking 
if any credit customer’s activities were excluded from the general ledger accounts 
receivable balance, I created an accounts receivable aging report listing each credit 
customer’s outstanding balances from the subsidiary ledger. I compared the aging 
reports’ items to the general ledger accounts receivable postings and noted each 
unmatched item. If there were no unmatched items, the accounts receivable balance 
in the general ledger was successfully reconciled and verified.
I then designed a diagnostic analysis strategy to determine which receivable activities 
were causing any unmatched items I had found. My strategy began with gathering the 
client’s accounts receivable process documentation. For each unmatched item, I iden-
tified which process caused the items to be included in both ledgers. Documenting my 
work helped me explain what, how, and why I performed each step. This record will be 
helpful when we repeat this verification in next year’s audit. Designing my own data 
and analysis strategies helped me gain relevant skills and the confidence to start 
my auditing career.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 4.1   Identify the components of 
a data analysis project plan.
•	 Create a Data Analysis Project 
Plan
•	 Sample Data Analysis Project 
Plan
Build a Project Plan for Inventory 
Costs
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.2   Describe how to develop a 
data strategy.
•	 Identify Appropriate Data
•	 Evaluate Data Fields and Sources
•	 Consider Data Strategy Risks and 
Implement Controls
Identify Data Characteristics 
(Example: Accounting Information 
Systems)
 LO 4.3   Explain how an analysis 
strategy is designed.
•	 Designing Analyses to Describe 
and Diagnose
•	 Designing Analyses to Predict and 
Prescribe
Create a Predictive Data Analysis 
Project Plan
(Example: Financial Accounting)
 LO 4.4   Summarize data and 
analyses strategies in professional 
practice areas.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing 
•	 Financial Accounting 
•	 Managerial Accounting 
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Strategies with 
Professional Practice Areas
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are 
­available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
4-2  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data 
Analysis Projects?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Identify the components of a data analysis project plan.
Recall that the first step in planning a data analysis project is understanding the motivations 
for the project, such as identifying problems, evaluating patterns and opportunities, measuring 
performance, and regulatory compliance. Considering the perspectives of the project’s primary 
stakeholders is an important part of that understanding. Next, thinking critically about a proj-
ect’s purpose helps define the objective and articulate the project’s specific questions. ­Common 
objectives and questions can be grouped by whether the analysis results describe, diagnose, or 
predict an outcome, or if the analysis results should prescribe future organizational strategy.
The final step of the data analysis planning stage is designing a professional plan for the 
data analysis project. Critical thinking continues to play a vital role, from selecting a strategy 
for the data and the analysis, to identifying inherent risks to both and embedding internal con-
trols to reduce them. A data and analysis strategy plan is an organized and deliberate blueprint 
for the project. It also allows someone other than its creator to perform the analysis, which 
can free accountants to perform other valuable services with their business and regulatory 
expertise.
Create a Data Analysis Project Plan
Many of us use planning tools every day, such as relying on navigation applications to plan 
travel time and how to get to new destinations. Planning tools make tasks more efficient and 
the results more effective. They also often provide logical explanations for the necessity of 
certain steps or why they should be performed in a particular order.
This chapter summarizes a tool for data analysis project planning that provides similar 
benefits for accountants (Illustration 4.1). The order of the components is intentional: 
Step 1 
Focus on the objective: 
•	Keep the project’s objective and specific questions in mind to select the best data and 
analysis strategies to fulfill the objective and answer those questions. Simply remember-
ing to ask how the plan’s proposed data and analysis strategy decisions relate to the objec-
tive helps us make better choices. 
Step 2 
Select a data strategy: 
•	Use critical thinking to develop and rank a few data alternatives. This ensures that we 
choose the data option most appropriate for the objective.
Step 3 
Select an analysis strategy: 
•	Use what was learned from selecting the data strategy and apply that same development 
and ranking process to analyses alternatives. Following this step increases the likelihood 
of selecting the best analysis option.
Step 4 
Consider risks: 
•	Considering and prioritizing critical risks to both the data and the analysis strategies 
reveals how these risks can create misleading and invalid results.
--- PAGE 4 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-3
ILLUSTRATION 4.1  A Data Analysis Project Plan
3
4
5
Stay focused on the project’s objective and specific questions.
Project Objective
1
Develop data alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Develop analysis alternatives and evaluate, rank, and select the best option.
Analysis Strategy
Identify risks to both the data strategy and analysis strategy.
Consider Risks
Implement controls to reduce risks within the data and analysis strategies.
Embed Controls
2 Data Strategy
Step 5 
Embed controls: 
•	Designing and implementing preventative and detective controls into the analysis process 
leads to results that are accurate, valid, and reliable.
A data analysis plan increases the likelihood that analysis results accurately describe what 
happened, diagnose why it happened, predict what is likely to happen, or prescribe the best 
course forward. When the project plan is complete, so is the data analysis process planning 
stage, and it is time to move to the analysis stage. The next chapter describes how to properly 
prepare data for analysis. But first, practice using this project planning tool in an accounting 
context.
Sample Data Analysis Project Plan
Imagine you are a financial accountant for WeMakeIt, Inc., which is an employee-owned 3D 
printing corporation in Phoenix, Arizona. They sell superhero figurines, mechanical shop 
tools, and medical prostheses that are manufactured with 3D printing technologies. Founded 
five years ago by a local college student, Marisabel Cordoba, WeMakeIt, Inc. grew quickly to 
fill their production capacities and has maintained a stable size for the last three years.
Step 1: Focus on the Objective
The project in this example is to estimate the bad debts in the 2025 year-end accounts receiv-
able balance. The result will be the value estimate for the 2025 year-end adjusting journal 
entry that debits bad debts expense and credits the allowance for uncollectible accounts 
contra-asset. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
4-4  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.1: Estimate Bad Debts
The U.S. GAAP ending accounts receivable method requires the following:
•	 The year-end accounts receivable balance can be considered in total or in age group subtotals. 
Age grouping rules for manufacturing companies are typically less than 30 days, 30 to 60 days, 
and greater than 60 days outstanding, but these vary by industry.
•	 Reviewing regulatory guidance, industry practices, business policies and processes, and past 
bad debt estimation percentages is the professional approach for selecting bad debt estima-
tion percentages. Typically, as the age of the accounts receivable increases, the percentage 
uncollectible applied to that age also increases (Knowledge).
Assume the following for this example:
•	The company offers its credit customers payment terms of 30 days.
•	The 2025 year-end accounts receivable balance in the general ledger is $83,734.30.
•	The 2025 year-end unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts has a credit balance 
of $3,000.
•	WeMakeIt, Inc. decided to use the percentage of year-end accounts receivable method to 
estimate bad debts expense each year. They have authorized a 2% bad debts assumption 
for invoices that are 30 to 60 days outstanding and 30% for invoices that are outstanding 
for more than 60 days.
This data analysis project has the following objective and related questions:
•	Objective: Accurately estimate bad debts within the year-end accounts receivable bal-
ance in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
•	Specific questions: 
	 1.  What is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receivables in the 2025 year-end 
outstanding accounts receivables? 
	 2.  What amount should be used in the adjusting journal entry for bad debts expense?
With the objective defined and the questions articulated, it is time to develop the data strategy.
Step 2: Select the Data Strategy
Develop several data alternatives that could help answer the objective question. Then, to select 
the most useful data alternative for the project plan, identify the factors you want to use to 
rank these alternatives, and assign values to each alternative’s factors. The best data strategy 
alternative is the one with the highest overall factor ratings.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.2: Consider Different 
Perspectives
The net realizable value of accounts receivable (accounts receivable minus the allowance for 
uncollectible accounts) is reported on the balance sheet as a current asset. The bad debts 
expense reduces net income reported on the income statement. Keep in mind that parties with 
very different perspectives use this information for decision-making (Stakeholders):
•	 Creditors, who want to be repaid, are interested in the liquidity of the assets.
•	 Shareholders, who predict future stock values as well as dividend expectations, must under-
stand the expected future cash inflows from operations.
•	 Managers want to earn bonuses that are determined by growth in net income and total assets. 
The change in the allowance for uncollectible accounts will influence both amounts.
--- PAGE 6 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-5
There are a few data strategy alternatives that could be considered either individually or in 
combination for this project:
•	All credit sales invoices and collections data that pertain to the accounting period.
•	All outstanding invoices included in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	The prior year-end’s adjusted account balance and the current year-end’s unadjusted 
account balance in the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
•	Current year’s total accounts receivable write-offs.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for accounts receivable age categories.
Recall that the objective question for this analysis project asks for a reasonable estimate of 
the year-end uncollectible accounts receivables. Because WeMakeIt, Inc. uses the GAAP per-
centage of ending accounts receivables method with the three age categories typical for man-
ufacturing companies, the data that would be most useful considering the objectives would 
include:
•	The outstanding invoices in the year-end accounts receivable balance.
•	This year’s unadjusted allowance for uncollectible account balance.
•	Authorized bad debt estimation percentages for each accounts receivable age group.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.3: Choose the Data Strategy 
that Fits Your Objective
Both data and analysis strategies are improved when they are developed, evaluated, and ranked 
by the factor values placed on each potential data strategy: 
•	 Factors that value data relevance, such as expected future collections, prior estimation 
­errors, and expected risk of uncollectibility should be used to select the best data strategy for 
­WeMakeIt, Inc’s analysis plan (Alternatives). 
•	 Using the data from outstanding invoices, the unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts 
receivable, and authorized bad debt estimation percentages was the best choice for WeMakeIt, 
Inc’s analysis. These data choices best match the objective of the analysis, which is to calculate 
a reasonable estimate for the year-end uncollectible accounts ­receivable (Purpose).
•	 For a personal example, if your objective was to dress successfully for an interview, then you 
could develop, evaluate, and rank the alternatives of wearing something you already own, 
borrowing from a friend, or buying something new to wear to the interview. Using clothes you 
already own would rank higher than buying new clothes if you were ranking ­options based on 
lowest costs and time factors. 
Step 3: Select the Analysis Strategy
For any project plan, choosing the best analysis strategy involves considering and evaluating 
several possible alternative analyses given the objective questions and the already selected 
strategy for the data. The analysis alternatives in this bad debt estimation example involve 
different methods for determining the age of an outstanding invoice:
•	Days outstanding from the invoice date forward.
•	Days outstanding from the due date forward.
The first analysis alternative is preferable because WeMakeIt, Inc.’s policy is to allow custom-
ers 30 days to pay their invoices and because they estimate bad debts only when an invoice is 
past its due date, which is equal to or more than 30 days outstanding.
Therefore, the first question, what is a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible receiv-
ables in the 2025 year-end outstanding accounts receivables, will be answered by summing 
--- PAGE 7 ---
4-6  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
each age group’s estimated bad debts value. This is a measure estimating the uncollectible 
portion of the year-end accounts receivable balance (­Illustration 4.2). ( Data See How To 
4.1 at the end of the chapter to learn how to calculate the figures in this illustration.)
ILLUSTRATION 4.2  WeMakeIt, Inc.: Estimated Value of Uncollectible Receivables
Total accounts receivable value
x % uncollectible
$ Estimated as uncollectible
Total
$ 30,099.29
0%
$                  0
< 30 days
$ 20,441.46
2%
$       408.83
30–60 days
$ 33,193.55
30%
$   9,958.07
$ 83,734.30
$ 10,366.89
> 60 days
The second question, what value should be used in the adjusting journal entry at year-end 
for bad debts expense, will be answered when this total of $ 10,366.89 is reduced by the unad-
justed year-end allowance for uncollectible accounts balance ($ 3,000). The resulting calcu-
lated value is the year-end adjusting journal entry debiting bad debt expense and crediting 
allowance for uncollectible accounts:
Debit
Credit
Bad debts expense
$ 7,366.89
    Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$ 7,366.89
Increasing the allowance account’s $3,000 unadjusted balance by $ 7,366.89 will result in an 
adjusted balance of $ 10,366.89, equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts in accounts 
receivable at the 2025 year end. Illustration 4.3 summarizes the first three steps of this 
­project’s plan.
ILLUSTRATION 4.3  In-Progress Project Plan for Estimating Year-End Bad Debts: Steps 1-3
3
4
5
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
Data Strategy Risks
Data Strategy Controls
2 Data Strategy
1. Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
2. Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
3. Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 days, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30-60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
     for the adjusting entry value.
This total answers
the first project
plan question
This result answers
the second project
plan question
This project plan is
incomplete. The steps
for evaluating risks
and embedding
controls are
covered next. 
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
How To
--- PAGE 8 ---
4.1 How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects? 4-7
 The last two steps are considering risks and controls for both the data strategy and the analy-
sis strategy. First we will evaluate the data strategy’s risks and controls, and then the analysis 
strategy risks and controls. 
Steps 4 and 5: Data Strategy Risks and Controls
 While organizations invest in processes and controls designed to capture accounting data 
correctly, accounting databases inevitably have some data issues.  In this example, the data 
include the 2025 year-end accounts receivable outstanding invoices and the authorized bad 
debt estimation percentages. There could be some risks to using this accounts receivable data:
•  Missing or incorrectly included invoices in the general or the subsidiary ledger. 
•  Errors in the invoice due date fields or the invoice total amounts. 
•  Errors created when the data are exported from the AIS system into the analysis tool. 
 APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 4.4: Threats to Data Strategy 
 Data risks can impact the accuracy and validity of analysis results. These risks must be evalu-
ated so appropriate controls can be added to the project plan.  Data strategy risks can include 
( Risks ):
•  Dirty data such as incomplete data, inaccurate data, and incorrectly formatted data fields. 
•  Data irrelevant to the objective of the project. 
•  Insuff icient data for the analysis to be reliable. 
•  Data that is an unrepresentative sample of the underlying population. 
•  Errors in management estimates and assumptions about the data. 
 These data risks can be controlled by comparing the extracted data to the source invoice and 
collection documents. Possible risks involving the management’s estimates of bad debt per-
centages include human bias embedded in the authorized bad debt percentages, changes in 
customer payment behavior, and business process changes to credit customer approvals and 
collection practices.
Company Accountant
External Auditor
These invoices are
99% collectible!
Only 86% of these
seem collectible...
 One way to control for these risks is to ask the finance, sales, and accounts receivable man-
agers if there were changes to the customer base, market conditions, or business policies and 
procedures for credit approval, write-offs, or collection policies during the year. This knowl-
edge could confirm existing bad debt percentages or motivate their adjustment. 
 Another control for evaluating the risks in management estimates and assumptions is 
to compare current data to prior year data. Evaluating increases in the median number of 
days outstanding and the number of new to returning customers in each age group can offer 
insights into the reasonableness of bad debt estimation percentages. 
 To illustrate, imagine you were wondering if the 30% bad debt percentage for invoices 
greater than 60 days outstanding was a reasonable management assumption in 2025. 
--- PAGE 9 ---
4-8  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Illustration 4.4 demonstrates that the median number of days outstanding in the greater 
than 60 days outstanding group increased in 2025.
ILLUSTRATION 4.4  Data Risk 
in Bad Debt Percentages: Median 
Days Outstanding
Aging Categories
30–60 days
45
61
> 60 days
2024 and 2025 Past-Due Accounts Receivable
Median Days Outstanding per Age Group
0
20
40
60
80
100
2024
2025
95
95
55
Additionally, you might wonder if this increase was caused by new customers, as the pay-
ment habits of new customers are more uncertain than those of continuing customers. 
Illustration 4.5 shows that the > 60 days age group has many outstanding invoices from 
new customers.
ILLUSTRATION 4.5  Data Risk in 
Bad Debt Percentages: Risks from 
New Customers
30–60 days
> 60 days
Comparing Past-Due Invoices for New Customers
vs. Returning Customers by Age Group
$0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
Returning Customer
New Customer
The results of these control tests indicate that if the 2024 bad debt percentage for this age 
group was used in 2025, it may not accurately measure the bad debts expected in the 2025 
accounts receivable balance. These visualizations show that implementing controls, such as 
data reasonableness tests, before performing an analysis can result in better business and pro-
fessional intelligence.
Steps 4 and 5: Analysis Strategy Risks and Controls
Common analysis risks include errors in data manipulation, calculation, or using technology, 
as well as human biases and ethical violations when using sensitive data. Here are some exam-
ples of analyses risks when estimating bad debts: 
•	Errors in age group categorization and age total calculations.
•	Incorrect application of bad debt estimation percentages to age group totals.
•	Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts across age groups.
•	Mistakes in the calculation of the value to use for bad debts expense.
Verifying the accuracy of the age group categorizations and each sum and multiplication per-
formed on age group data items and totals would control for these risks.
Another control is to use common sense when reviewing the results for reasonableness. 
Illustration 4.6 uses an example from the 30–60 days age group estimation to show how a 
common sense check helps catch large errors. The total outstanding accounts receivable for 
that age group was $ 20,441.46, and the uncollectible percentage for that group was 2%. The 
--- PAGE 10 ---
4.1  How do Accountants Design Data Analysis Projects?  4-9
estimated uncollectible value for that age group was calculated as the product of those two 
numbers, resulting in $ 408.83. This control has verified our calculation.
ILLUSTRATION 4.6  Common 
Sense Check for the 30–60 Days 
Group Results
Common Sense
Step 1
2% is 1/5th of 10%
10% is easy to
calculate!
Now, just divide this
by 5 to get the 2% amount.
Results for this age group
were $408.83. We can be
confident in our result.
Common Sense
Step 2
10% of $20,441 = $2,044
Common Sense
Step 3
$2,044 divided by 5 = $409 
Analysis results that significantly vary from common sense checks should be verified.
The project plan design for this example is now complete (Illustration 4.7).
ILLUSTRATION 4.7  Complete Project Plan for Estimating Bad Debts
3
Questions: 1. What is the estimated value of uncollectible accounts receivable at year-end?
                         2. What is the amount that should be used in the year-end bad debts adjusting journal entry?
Use U.S. GAAP to estimate bad debts in year-end accounts receivable balance.
Objective
1
Analysis Strategy
2 Data Strategy
The following data should be used in the analysis:
• Outstanding invoices in year-end accounts receivable.
• Authorized estimated bad debt percentages: 2% for 30–60 days; 30% for > 60 days groups.
• Unadjusted allowance for uncollectible accounts year-end balance.
1. Age outstanding invoices by sorting by date into < 30 day, 30–60 days, and > 60 days groups.
2. Create a total of the invoice values for each of these three aged groups.
3. Multiply 30–60 days group total by 2% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
4. Multiply > 60 days group total by 30% for the uncollectible value estimate for this group.
5. Sum uncollectible value estimates from steps 3 and 4 for total uncollectible value estimate.
6. Subtract step #5 total from allowance for uncollectible accounts unadjusted balance of $3,000
      for the adjusting entry value.
4
• Errors in age group categorization and
   calculations.
 • Erroneous application of bad debt estimation
   percentages to age group totals.
 • Erroneous summing of estimated bad debts
   across age groups.
 • Errors in the calculation of the value to use for
   bad debts expense.
Data Strategy Risks
• Data errors (missing data, due date errors, invoice
   total errors).
• Data extraction errors.
• Inaccurate management assumptions and
   estimates (bad debt percentages).
4
Analysis Strategy Risks
5
• Verify all classifications and groupings.
 • Verify all calculations.
 • Verify correct use of analysis technologies.
 
Data Strategy Controls
• Compare extracted data to source documentation.
• Compare to prior period to verify management
   estimates and assumptions.
• Review customer, policy and procedure changes.
5
Analysis Strategy Controls
This total
answers the first
project plan question
This result
answers the second
project plan question
--- PAGE 11 ---
4-10  CHAPTER 4  Planning Data and Analysis Strategies
Next, we go into more depth about how to develop both data and analysis strategies.
Apply It 4.1
Build a Project Plan 
for Inventory Costs
Financial Accounting   Founded by Elisabeth Hess and based in Wisconsin, Tremendous Toys 
produces and sells unique ­animal-form toys online. The company has over a million dollars in sales 
revenues and a strong national and international following. The investment bank underwriting its 
upcoming initial public offering requires that Elisabeth produce a U.S. GAAP valuation of year-end 
inventory.
Elisabeth has kept meticulous records, organized in business cost categories, which are listed 
here. She knows which materials were used to create each toy, which employee built it, and how 
long each took to create. She has also recorded the number and type of toys produced every month. 
­However, she has never assigned costs to her inventory items.
Materials
Labor
Overhead
Plastic for 3D 
printers
Production workers’ time
3D printer costs
Wood
Production workers’ pay rate
Production tools costs
Resin
Computer (peripherals and internet) 
costs
Fiber and fabric
Shipping costs
Paints, varnishes, 
and dyes
Factory rent, utilities, and storage
Toy clothing
Production supplies
Glues and epoxies
Tax and legal fees
Bling and other 
accessories
Donations to charities
Eyes and body parts
Advertising costs
Prepare a data analysis project plan to help Elisabeth develop her inventoriable costs. Use the follow-
ing structure for your answer.
	 1.	Project objective and specific question
	 2.	Data strategy
	 3.	Analysis strategy
	 4.	Data and analysis strategy risks
	 5.	Data and analysis strategy controls
SOLUTION
	 1.	Project objective
	
	 Specific question
Prepare a U.S. GAAP compliant full costing valuation for 
Tremendous Toys’ current inventory.
What is the U.S. GAAP year-end value of inventory?
	 2.	Data strategy
•	 Collect all costs and raw measures of consumption of 
resources related to production (direct materials, direct 
labor, and manufacturing overhead costs) for the last 
three years.
•	 Collect records of how many units were produced for each 
month of cost data received.
•	 Take a physical count of the current inventory by product.
(Continued)
--- PAGE 12 ---
4.2  What Should We Consider When Selecting Data for Analysis?  4-11
	 3.	Analysis strategy
•	 Aggregate cost data by monthly production of figurines.
•	 Estimate cost behavior using regression to find variable 
costs per figurine and total fixed production costs per 
month.
•	 Apply results to year-end inventory.
	 4.	Risks to data strategy 
	
	 Risks to analysis strategy 
•	 Missing data.
•	 Including personal expenses.
•	 Material costs and worker costs may not be representa-
tive of true replacement costs of future material and labor 
costs.
•	 Potential bias for minimizing cost information to make 
business seem more profitable.
•	 Averaging costs across figurines may not be accurate if 
true costs of different figurines vary significantly.
•	 Regression may not have strong explanatory power 
(R-square).
•	 Costs may have seasonality differences (due to scarcity of 
materials or heating and cooling costs).
•	 Cost formula may need to be recalculated annually to cap-
ture cost changes.
	 5.	Data strategy controls
	
	 Analysis strategy controls
•	 Interview Elisabeth with a typical list of inventory costs to 
catch omitted costs.
•	 Inquire about the seasonal or economic trends of mate-
rials, labor and production overhead costs, and use the 
average of the highest and lowest points.
•	 Use median tendencies rather than means.
•	 Run sensitivity models with future replacement cost val-
ues to note potential risk in final product cost estimations 
and possible data bias.
4.2  What Should We Consider When 
Selecting Data for Analysis?
