8-12 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
8.3  How Do We Know the Analysis 
Makes Sense?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➌
Determine if the data analysis results answer the question and align with the objective of 
the analysis.
Recall that the first step in data interpretation is determining if the analysis makes sense. 
This may seem like an obvious question, but it is one that is often overlooked. It is even more 
important when trying to understand an analysis of something unfamiliar. In terms of data 
analysis, asking if the analysis “makes sense” means confirming the analysis has a clear 
meaning.  
Using critical thinking skills, determine if the analysis answers the intended question and 
aligns with objective, if the correct data and methods were used, and if the results are both 
reasonable and sufficent for the project’s purpose. 
Evaluate the Data and Methods
Questions we can ask to determine if the analysis makes sense include thinking about how 
we got the results:
•	Are the data used in the analysis reasonable given the question/objective of the analysis?
•	Is the analysis method reasonable given the question/objective of the analysis? 
Purpose
Evaluate expenses by hotel site and determine which 
locations have experienced increases. 
Alternatives
There may be alternative analyses that could or should 
be prepared. There could also be different explanations 
for why expenses have increased. For example, increases 
in hotel occupancy could drive increases in hotel 
expenses. 
Risks
Data may be missing or incorrect. An analysis could be 
incorrectly interpreted. 
Knowledge
Knowledge about the company and the industry, hotel 
expenses, and the preparation and interpretation of data 
analyses is necessary.
Self-reflection
There could be expense analyses from prior projects that 
could be applied to this one. Consider whether you could 
apply what was learned during this project to future 
projects. 

8.3  How Do We Know the Analysis Makes Sense? 
8-13
Illustration 8.9 is an analysis designed to show if Super Scooters’ labor expenses in the Char-
lotte, NC location increased as sales volume increased.
Are the data used in the analysis reasonable given the question/objective of the analysis?
•	The data used in this chart are labor expenses and sales volume. It is reasonable to use 
these two measures since we want to know if they are related. In other words, do both 
measures move in the same direction?
Is the analysis method reasonable given the question/objective of the analysis? 
•	A dual axis chart compares two different measures in one graph. Labor expense num-
bers ($50 thousand–$250 thousand) are much larger than sales volume numbers (1,000– 
4,000). If a clustered column chart (Illustration 8.10) was used instead, the sales volume 
bar would be too small to distinguish a relationship. 
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
1,609
2,871
3,743
$0
2022
0
1,000
1,500
500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
Sales
Volume
Labor
Expenses
2023
2024
Charlotte, NC
Sales Volume and Labor Expenses
Year
Labor Expenses
Sum of Sales Volume
ILLUSTRATION 8.9  Dual Axis Chart of Sales Volume and Labor Expenses
ILLUSTRATION 8.10  Clustered 
Column Chart of Sales Volume and 
Labor Expenses
$250,000
$200,000
$150,000
$100,000
$69,834
$146,024
$205,673
$50,000
$0
2022
2023
2024
Charlotte, NC
Sales Volume and Labor Expenses
Sales
Volume
Labor Expenses by Year
Labor Expenses
Sum of Sales Volume

8-14 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
Examine the Results
There are also questions that evaluate the reasonableness of the results themselves: 
•	Are the results of the analysis reasonable given what is known about the subject being 
analyzed? 
•  Super Scooters manufactures the scooters they sell. It makes sense that as the number 
of scooters sold increases, they would need to produce more scooters. Increased pro-
duction would lead to increased labor.
•	Are the implications of the analysis reasonable given what is known about the subject 
being analyzed? 
•  The implication is that if Super Scooters continue to increase sales, then they will 
have increased labor costs. 
•	Does the analysis address the needs/concerns of the stakeholders?
•  The overall concern is whether increases in sales and labor costs at the Charlotte 
location are related. The stakeholders include management of Super Scooters and the 
employees in the Charlotte locations. This analysis will help them better understand 
the relationship between sales volume and labor costs. 
If the answers to any of these questions is “no,” then it is likely that either more or a dif-
ferent analysis is necessary before the results can be interpreted. 
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 8.1: Ask if the Analysis 
Makes Sense 
Notice the relationship between these questions and the previous discussion about applying 
critical thinking. To answer these questions, you need to know: 
•	 Who is impacted by the analysis (Stakeholders).
•	 The reason for performing the analysis (Purpose).  
•	 Whether the results are reasonable given what you know (Knowledge).
•	 If you can apply past experience or knowledge to the current context and whether what you 
learn now can be leveraged in future analyses (Self-Reflection). 
Determine if More Information or Analyses 
are Necessary
Even if the interpretation makes sense, sometimes more information or additional analy-
ses are still necessary to thoroughly answer the question. It is easy to believe we have the 
information necessary to decide on a course of action. This is a common human bias that 
Nobel Prize winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman refers to as the “what you see is all 
there is” bias. 
This bias can be particularly strong if the data analysis supports preconceived ideas or 
conclusions about the question. Accountants must be skeptical evaluators of information, so 
we must diligently review data analyses to be sure they provide enough information and sup-
port to make a well-informed decision.
There are more biases to be aware of when interpreting data analyses: 
•	Confirmation bias: The person performing the analysis wants to prove a predeter-
mined assumption, so they look for data that support their existing belief. The person 

8.3  How Do We Know the Analysis Makes Sense? 
8-15
interpreting the analysis can also have this bias. Being aware of the preparer’s poten-
tial biases, as well as our own, can help to mitigate confirmation bias.
•	Selection bias: This bias occurs when the data used in the analysis are selected subjec-
tively. Selection bias is a concern if the analysis being interpreted is based on a sample 
of data rather than the entire population. An example is when an analysis of sales 
transactions is based on a sample of transactions rather than on all the transactions. If 
the sample is not a good representation of the full population, then the results will be 
biased. 
Continuing the Super Scooters example, additional analyses are necessary before making 
a keep or drop decision. Imagine that you asked for additional information about costs and 
were given the analysis in Illustration 8.11. (Assume you have already determined that the 
analysis makes sense.) 
This analysis provides some key cost information, but do you need more? Variable 
costs will be eliminated if the Celeritas model is dropped, but what about fixed costs? Ask 
for that information as well. Do not assume that the sales and variable costs analyses are 
all that is needed to decide whether the Celeritas model should be dropped. There is also 
the potential for selection bias and confirmation bias. Consider a few questions to look for 
selection bias: 
•	Did the preparer of the sales and variable cost analyses use all the information available, 
or did they select just a sample of that information? 
•	If it was a sample, is the sample representative of all sales and all variable costs? 
To mitigate the potential of confirmation bias, examine your perspective about the analyses. 
Was the interpretation approached with an open mind, or were you already leaning in favor of 
or against dropping the Celeritas model?
ILLUSTRATION 8.11  Variable 
Costs by Super Scooters Model
$2,600,000
Captain
Celeritas
Kicks
Lazer
$2,400,000
$2,200,000
$2,000,000
$1,800,000
$1,600,000
$1,400,000
$1,200,000
$1,000,000
$800,000
$600,000
$400,000
$200,000
$0
2022
2023
2024
Total Variable Costs By Model
Total Variable
Costs
Apply It 8.3 
Interpret a Refund 
Analysis
Data   Managerial Accounting   Luciana at DHI is concerned about the amount of refunds given 
to customers. She has asked you to speak to the hotel area managers to gain more insight, and then 
interpret an analysis prepared by another employee to identify the type of location with the highest 
amount of refunds. After speaking with the hotel area managers, you learn:
•	 Front desk employees can give refunds to hotel guests without approval from the general 
manager. 

8-16 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
DHI Refunds and Guest Complaints Dual Axis Chart
$0
$0.00
$10.00
$20.00
$30.00
$40.00
$50.00
$60.00
$20,000
Airport
Interstate
Metro/Town
Suburban
Urban
$40,000
$60,000
$80,000
$100,000
$120,000
$140,000
$160,000
Location Type
Total
Refunds
Average Refund
per Complaint
Total Refunds
Average Refund per Complaint
•	 Area managers think the number of guest complaints is strongly related to the total amount 
of refunds. If there are many guest complaints, there will likely be a higher amount of total 
refunds.
SOLUTION
1.	 The data seem reasonable. The purpose is understanding guest complaints and refunds. Both 
of those items are included in the analysis. Average refunds per complaint expresses the refund 
amount on a per complaint basis.
2.	 The objective is to identify the location type with the highest amount of refunds. The analysis 
does show total refunds given on one axis using bars for each location’s refunds.
	
The analysis also shows average refund per complaint as a line with average refunds per 
complaint on the right axis. This is a reasonable way to evaluate the relationship between 
complaints and refunds because using the average refund per complaints helps look at each 
location based on its performance rather than size.
3.	 The area managers were convinced that the number of complaints is related to the total 
amount of refunds. The analysis shows the average amount of refunds is highest for airport 
locations even though the suburban locations have a higher total.
4.	 There are much higher total refunds in the suburban locations, so it might seem they would 
have the highest number of complaints. However, if there are more hotels in that category, that 
may also be driving the total number of complaints. By using average refund per complaint, 
we can see that airport locations are giving very high refunds to guests even though the total 
refund amount is not as high as suburban locations.
5.	 The analysis addresses the needs of the stakeholders to an extent. The analysis is one piece of 
this puzzle.
6.	 Yes, more analysis is necessary. To be sure that we have addressed the stakeholders, further 
analysis is required to address the concern about hotels offering too many refunds.
1.	 Are the data used in the analysis reasonable? 
2.	 Is the analysis reasonable? 
3.	 Are the results of the analysis reasonable given what you know about the subject being analyzed? 
4.	 Are the implications of the analysis reasonable given what you know about the subject being 
analyzed? 
5.	 Does the analysis address the needs and concerns of the stakeholders? 
6.	 Is more analysis needed? If yes, what analyses would you like to see before making a decision? 

8.4  How are Validity and Reliability Determined in Descriptive and Diagnostic Analyses?  8-17
8.4  How are Validity and Reliability 
Determined in Descriptive and 
Diagnostic Analyses?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➍
Evaluate the validity and reliability of descriptive and diagnostic data analysis results.
Once it is clear that the analysis makes sense, the results can be assessed for validity and 
reliability. If the results are not valid, then it does not matter how “good” the analysis is. 
Sometimes it is easy to be fooled by data analyses because we take them at face value. Recall 
the example at the start of the chapter. Megan’s staff tax accountant checked the numbers 
and assumed the analysis was correct. However, the analysis result was an increase in tax 
liability when it should have been a decrease. The staff accountant should have been more 
skeptical of the analysis and considered that a large loss should have caused a decrease in 
the tax liability. 
First, what does valid and reliable mean in the context of data analysis? 
•	Evaluating the validity of a data analysis involves confirming that it measures what 
it is supposed to measure and represents reality. 
•	Reliability means that the data used are dependable and trustworthy and the measures 
used in the analysis are consistent and accurate. In this context, accurate means the 
measures used in the analysis are correct and without mistakes. 
During your career you will interpret the validity and reliability of different types of analy-
ses. Illustration 8.12 summarizes the types of analyses most common in the four areas of 
analytics.
ILLUSTRATION 8.12  Summary 
of Analyses by Analytics Area
Data Analytics Categorized by Purpose
Frequency
Distributions
Cross
Tabulation
Measures of
Location
Measures of
Dispersion
Anomaly
Detection
Correlation
Analysis
Trend
Analysis
Linear
Regression
Predictive
Algorithms
Optimization
Models
What-If
Analyses
Descriptive
Analytics
Diagnostic
Analytics
Predictive
Analytics
Prescriptive
Analytics
This section reviews the most common types of analyses used in descriptive and diag-
nostic analytics, how to identify appropriate measures for each type, and how to determine 
if the results are valid.
