8-6 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
Apply It 8.1
Interpret Revenue 
Visualization
Data   Financial Accounting   Denton Hospitality, Inc. (DHI) is a hotel chain in the southwestern 
United States. Dante Garcia started the hotel chain in Denton, Texas in 1968 with one hotel. Since 
then, the chain has grown to 48 hotels in 4 states. Dante retired in 2002 and was succeeded as CEO by 
his daughter, Luciana. 
DHI’s hotels are in the economy lodging segment. Properties are in Colorado, Oklahoma, New 
Mexico, and Texas. A typical economy lodging hotel has an average of 84 rooms, although DHI’s 
hotels average 117 rooms. Properties are staffed by a general manager, front desk staff of 6 persons, 
a head housekeeper, 7 housekeepers, and a maintenance worker. Except for the general manager, 
employees are paid hourly and their assigned hours vary based on demand. A summary of DHI’s 
financial performance is provided.
Grand Total
Number of 
Hotels
State
$      8,491,172
$      6,972,316
5
7
5
31
Revenue
2024
Revenue
2025
Profit
2024
CO
NM
OK
TX
$      6,223,433
$ 62,907,543
48
$   41,220,622
$     8,414,229
$     6,942,074
$     6,156,051
$ 61,584,276
$   40,071,922
$      4,025,218
$      3,701,428
$      3,178,742
$ 29,226,377
$    18,320,989
Profit
2025
$     3,862,043
$     3,582,689
$     2,928,290
$ 26,921,198
$   16,548,176
Summary of DHI Financial Performance
DHI would like to know how revenue compares by state and if revenues are rising or falling. 
Luciana has asked you to interpret this analysis. 
1.	 List the questions you would ask to interpret this analysis, and provide the answers. 
2.	 Is this exploratory data analysis or data analysis interpretation?
State
Revenue
2024
2025
$0
CO
$7.0$6.9
$6.2 $6.2
$41.2 $40.1
NM
OK
TX
$5
$10
$15
Denton Hospitality, Inc. ‒ Revenue By State
$20
$25
$30
$35
$40
$45
$8.5 $8.4
SOLUTION
1.	 Does the analysis answer the question and align with the objective? Yes: 
•	 The question is how the states’ revenues compare and if revenues are increasing. 
•	 The chart shows revenue by state and a comparison to the prior year.

8.2  What is the Relationship Between Critical Thinking and Data Analysis Interpretation?  8-7
8.2  What is the Relationship 
Between Critical Thinking and Data 
Analysis Interpretation?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➋
Apply critical thinking to data analysis interpretation. 
In the chapter opener, Megan discussed the importance of critical thinking in data analysis. 
Thinking deeply about the analysis helps interpret the results and avoids being “. . . so caught 
up in the details that I rationalized the results instead of asking more questions.” Applying a 
critical thinking framework to the analysis being interpreted ensures that we are consistently 
thinking critically about every analysis. 
Let’s use critical thinking to interpret a data analysis prepared by someone else. The man-
ufacturing firm Super Scooters makes four models of scooters: 
•	The Captain and Lazer models are electric scooters. 
•	The Kicks model is not powered. 
•	The Celeritas is a gas-powered scooter. 
Were the correct data and methods used to perform the analysis? Yes:
•	 DHI is interested in revenue performance. This chart includes revenue.
•	 DHI also wants to know performance by state and if revenue is increasing. This bar 
chart shows that information by grouping revenue by state and showing current year 
compared to prior year.
Are the results reasonable? Maybe:  
•	 It is necessary to confirm an understanding of DHI and their revenue to make a final 
decision about reasonableness. 
•	 The bar chart shows how many hotels are in each state. It seems reasonable that 
Texas has the highest amount of revenue because about 65% of all the hotels are in 
Texas.
Is the analysis valid? That is, did it measure what it was intended to measure? Maybe: 
•	 The results seem to be valid because the analysis measured what was intended– 
revenue by state and comparisons to prior year.
Is the analysis accurate (reliable)? Maybe: 
•	 More research is necessary to compare the results to the financial statements to 
ensure all the revenue is represented and that the analysis is accurate.
2.	 Since DHI asked for an interpretation of the analysis, it would seem logical that this is an 
interpretation. If the task was interpreting this analysis to determine additional analyses that 
could be performed based on the outcome, it could be considered exploratory. 

8-8 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
Super Scooters has benefited from the increase in scooter-sharing systems in large cities. 
Like bike-sharing, a scooter-sharing system is a service that provides scooters for short-term 
rentals. The global market for electric scooters is estimated to reach $34.7 billion by 2028.1 
Companies such as Lime and Bird are purchasing large quantities of electric scooters as the 
market for scooter-sharing expands. Super Scooters believes the time may be right to move 
to manufacturing only electric scooters to potentially increase sales to companies like Lime 
and Bird. Imagine you are a staff accountant who is part of a team evaluating whether to con-
tinue producing the Celeritas model gas scooter. Let’s apply the elements of critical thinking 
(Illustration 8.5) to this example.
1https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/electric-scooters-market
ILLUSTRATION 8.5  The SPARKS 
Critical Thinking Framework
Purpose
Risks
Self-
Reflection
Knowledge
Stakeholders
Alternatives
Interpret
ILLUSTRATION 8.6  Super 
Scooters’ Internal and External 
Stakeholders
Internal Stakeholders
External Stakeholders
• Super Scooters Managers
• Super Scooters Employees
• Investors
• Creditors
Stakeholders: Understand the Context
Before interpreting the analysis provided by the Celeritas marketing team, consider who 
the stakeholders are in this decision. Identifying stakeholders (Illustration 8.6) provides 
insight into the situation within which the data analysis was created. This knowledge can 
help explain the results. 

8.2  What is the Relationship Between Critical Thinking and Data Analysis Interpretation?  8-9
Failing to identify the stakeholders means potentially interpreting the results from the 
wrong perspective. In this example, if you were not thinking about Super Scooters’ creditors, 
you may not consider the impact of dropping the Celeritas scooter on the company’s ability to 
pay their existing loans. 
Purpose: Define the “Why” of the Analysis
In addition to recognizing relevant stakeholders, identify the purpose of the analysis. It is easy 
to forget this and immediately start interpreting. Be careful not to fall into this trap! We cannot 
fully interpret an analysis until we know its purpose.
In this example, Super Scooters is considering eliminating the Celeritas scooter. The 
Celeritas marketing team has prepared an analysis of sales for the last four years and a forecast 
for 2026. The shaded part of the line represents the 2026 forecast. The purpose of the analysis 
is to understand the sales trends for the four models of powered scooters that Super Scooters 
currently manufactures and sells. 
Overlooking the purpose could mean interpreting the analysis incorrectly. If you did not 
know the purpose of the analysis in Illustration 8.7 was to evaluate the Celeritas model, you 
might waste time evaluating a different model.
ILLUSTRATION 8.7  Super Scooters Forecast
Lazer
0
1,000
2,000
Kicks
0
1,000
2,000
Celeritas
Model
0
1,000
2,000
Captain
Super Scooters 2026 Forecast - Sales Volume (Units)
0
1,000
2,000
Nov.
2026
May
2026
May
2023
May
2024
May
2025
Nov.
2025
Nov.
2022
Nov.
2023
Nov.
2024
Alternatives: Investigate Other Interpretations 
Always consider if there are alternative ways to view the results of an analysis. Additionally, 
consider if there are alternative methods to conduct the analysis that were not addressed. 
Finally, decide if more analysis is needed. Thinking about these different alternatives helps 
determine whether the most appropriate analysis was used, which can increase confidence 
when interpreting the results. 

8-10 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
In the Super Scooters example, alternative interpretations may include:
•	The trend analysis assumptions do not include potential impact to sales of the other mod-
els should the Celeritas be eliminated.
•	The trend analysis assumptions may be too aggressive. 
•	The trend analysis alone is not enough information on which to base a decision to keep 
or drop the Celeritas scooter.
•	The Kicks model has the poorest performance. Perhaps that model should be evaluated 
for elimination instead of the Celeritas.
Risks: Consider Data, Analysis, and Bias
Examine all aspects of the analysis to identify potential risks. This begins with the data 
and extends to potential biases–both our own and those of stakeholders. Asking certain 
questions can help evaluate these potential risks. Illustration 8.8 lists the risks, questions 
that could be asked to evaluate them, and applies a Super Scooters example. Keep in mind 
that if you are the preparer of the analysis, then you will have already addressed some of 
these issues. 
Potential Risks
Questions
Super Scooters Examples
Data
•	 Completeness: Is the analysis 
missing relevant data?
•	 Accuracy: Are the data used in the 
analysis correct?
•	 Timeliness: Are the data used in  
the analysis the most recent 
available?
•	 Internal controls: Were  
appropriate internal controls in 
place to ensure the data used were 
correct?
•	 Some of the sales data were not 
included or may be incorrect. 
•	 The data starts in 2022 and 
continues through 2026, so 
they appear timely. 
Analysis
•	 Method: Was the correct method 
used to perform the analysis?
•	 Data: Did the analysis use the right 
data?
•	 Purpose: Did the analysis answer 
the question?
•	 The purpose of the analysis 
was to understand sales  
trends for the Super Scooter 
models. 
•	 The analysis uses sales 
amounts from 2022 to 2025, 
so it does show how sales are 
trending.
•	 The risk of using the wrong 
estimates to forecast the 2026 
figures should be considered.
Bias 
•	 Data biases: Were all the necessary 
and appropriate data included in the 
analysis?
•	 Preparer biases: Did the preparer 
have any potential biases that could 
have influenced the preparation of 
the analysis?
•	 Evaluator biases: Does the evaluator 
(you) have any biases that could 
influence the interpretation of the 
results? 
•	 The data could be biased if the 
analysis did not include all the 
available sales data. 
•	 The preparer could be  
biased to provide a positive 
analysis if they do not want  
to eliminate the Celeritas 
model. 
•	 The evaluator could be biased 
in favor of eliminating the 
Celeritas or in favor of keeping 
the Celeritas model.
ILLUSTRATION 8.8  Questions 
that Help Identify Risks

8.2  What is the Relationship Between Critical Thinking and Data Analysis Interpretation?  8-11
Knowledge: What We Need to Know 
To interpret any analysis, determine the knowledge necessary to understand it. We may not 
have the correct background or experience, so identifying the required understanding will 
reveal if we need to do additional research. It helps to ask these questions: 
•	Is specific accounting knowledge necessary?
•	Would industry knowledge be helpful?
•	Is technology knowledge important to interpret the analysis? 
•	Is additional research necessary, or should we seek the help of an expert? 
What types of knowledge are required for interpreting the Celeritas marketing team’s 
analysis? 
•	Accounting knowledge: Understanding the sales forecast requires knowing the sales 
revenue and how the forecast was calculated. To determine whether to discontinue the 
Celeritas model, an understanding of costs, cost volume profit analyses, and how to per-
form a keep or drop analysis are necessary. 
•	Industry knowledge: Super Scooters operates in the automotive and transportation 
industry, so you would need information about the manufacturing industry of gas-­
powered scooters and electric-powered scooters. Learning about the supply chain for 
the manufacture of gas and electric scooters, as well as the competitors in scooter man-
ufacturing, would also be important.
•	Technology knowledge: In this example, the visualization shows the sales and sales 
forecast for the Celeritas model (Illustration 8.7). Understanding how this visualization 
was created would be helpful since that software knowledge will help you better evaluate 
the visualization. 
•	Other knowledge: If there is accounting, industry, or technical knowledge you need, do 
additional research and/or solicit the help of someone with that knowledge.
Self-Reflection: Think About Lessons Learned
Each data analysis project should include reflecting on lessons learned from previous analyses 
performed or interpreted. We can also learn from the current data analysis being performed or 
interpreted and apply that to future data analysis projects. Reflecting on previous experiences 
helps us perform interpretations quickly, thoroughly, and accurately. 
In the Super Scooters example, reflect on other analyses you have performed that may be 
similar. Did you do any keep or drop analyses in your college courses? Have you analyzed sales 
trend analyses prior to this? If so, how can you apply those experiences to this interpretation?
Apply It 8.2
Evaluate a Cost 
Analysis
Auditing   Denton Hospitality, Inc. (DHI) CEO Luciana Garcia is concerned about growing costs 
in some of the hotels and has asked the internal audit department to evaluate which hotels have 
increasing costs over the past two years. As an internal auditor for DHI, your manager asked you to 
prepare and interpret an analysis of costs by hotel for the past two years and identify the locations 
with the highest increases. 
List each critical thinking element and identify how you would apply it to this example. 
SOLUTION
Critical Thinking Element
Example
Stakeholders
Internal: Purchasing department, hotel management 
External: Creditors, vendors
