Multiple Choice Questions 
8-39
•  The input range is the data used to calculate descriptive statistics. In this example it is 
column B.
•  Start with the column title and scroll to the bottom of the data set. (Hint: clicking in the 
title cell and holding Shift, Ctrl, and the keyboard down arrow will capture all the data 
in that column.)
STEP 4: Create the statistics output by clicking Labels and Summary Statistics.
Select Output Range and choose a cell in the current worksheet for the results, or click New 
Worksheet and Excel will put the results in a new workbook (Illustration 8.42).
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Data analysis results interpretation is the process of
a.	 evaluating an analysis to understand and explain its meaning.
b.	 performing descriptive analysis procedures to better under-
stand the data.
c.	 exploring data to better understand relationships.
d.	 transforming data to enable analysis.
2.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is not a question addressed in data 
analysis results interpretation? 
a.	 Were the correct data used to perform the analysis?
b.	 Was the correct technology used to perform the analysis?
c.	 Is the analysis biased?
d.	 Were the appropriate analysis methods used?
3.  (LO 1)  If the person preparing the analysis left out observations they 
did not think mattered to the decision, this would be an example of
a.	 data cleaning.
b.	 incorrect analysis methods.
c.	 fraud decision.
d.	 selection bias.
4.  (LO 1)  One of the most valued aspects of accountants is the ability 
to
a.	 be independent and skeptical evaluators of financial information. 
b.	 perform difficult calculations.
c.	 identify employees committing fraud.
d.	 remember financial information.
5.  (LO 2)  To fully interpret data analysis results, 
a.	 identify the person who prepared the analysis.
b.	 identify the purpose of the analysis.
c.	 prepare the analysis yourself.
d.	 have all the knowledge needed to understand the analysis.
6.  (LO 2)  When interpreting data analysis results, 
a.	 consider only internal stakeholders affected by the results.
b.	 stakeholders are not relevant to the interpretation.
c.	 consider only external stakeholder affected by the results.
d.	 consider internal and external stakeholders potentially 
affected by the results. 
7.  (LO 2)  Data analysis results that do not include the most recent 
data is an example of what type of risk? 
a.	 Incorrect method of 
analysis
b.	 Preparer bias
c.	 Timeliness
d.	 Completeness
8.  (LO 2)  When interpreting data analysis results, which of the fol-
lowing could be a potential analysis risk? 
a.	 Incorrect method
b.	 Missing relevant data
c.	 Data biases
d.	 Internal controls
9.  (LO 2)  The process of thinking about how past experiences can 
be applied to a current data analysis interpretation is which aspect of 
critical thinking? 
a.	 Stakeholder identification
b.	 Alternatives
c.	 Self-reflection
d.	 Purpose
10.  (LO 3)  An analysis prepared to support a predetermined belief is 
an example of
a.	 selection bias. 
b.	 fraud. 
c.	 confirmation bias. 
d.	 affect bias. 
11.  (LO 3)  Which of the following describes the process of determin-
ing whether results of an analysis are reasonable given the intended 
question or purpose of analysis? 
a.	 Making sense
b.	 Checking totals
c.	 Statistical analysis
d.	 Preparing data 
visualizations
12.  (LO 3)  If the answer to the question “Does the analysis address 
the needs/concerns of the stakeholders?” is no, then 
a.	 you must re-do the same analysis to see if you get different results.
b.	 it will likely be acceptable if the numbers are correct.
c.	 it is likely the stakeholders did not understand the problem.
d.	 it is likely that a different analysis is needed before you can 
interpret the results. 
13.  (LO 3)  When comparing two variables with different measure-
ment scales
a.	 a clustered column chart is best to visually compare the variables.
b.	 a clustered bar chart is best to visually compare the variables.
c.	 a dual axis chart is best to visually compare the variables.
d.	 a line graph is best to visually compare the variables.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 

8-40 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
14.  (LO 4)  When assessing the reliability of the data analysis results, 
evaluate whether the
a.	 measures used are accurate and consistent.
b.	 measures used measure what they are supposed to.
c.	 data used are timely.
d.	 data used are reasonable.
15.  (LO 4)  An appropriate analysis to determine how many times an 
event has occurred would be
a.	 a measure of location.
b.	 a measure of dispersion.
c.	 a frequency distribution.
d.	 linear optimization.
16.  (LO 4)  An anomaly is
a.	 always an outlier.
b.	 an observation that deviates from what is normal or expected.
c.	 always eliminated.
d.	 an indication of fraud.
17.  (LO 4)  When examining the relationship between two variables, if 
one variable increases as the other variable decreases the relationship is 
a.	 a positive correlation.
b.	 a negative correlation.
c.	 uncorrelated.
d.	 perfectly correlated.
18.  (LO 4)  If the objective is to use historical data to identify patterns, 
which is the best analysis to use?
a.	 Linear optimization
b.	 Frequency distribution
c.	 Trend analysis
d.	 Linear regression
19.  (LO 5)  Which of the following analyses can predict a future 
outcome?
a.	 Standard deviation
b.	 Linear optimization
c.	 Crosstabulation analysis
d.	 Linear regression
20.  (LO 5)  The goal of predictive analytics is to build a model that
a.	 can help predict or better understand a phenomenon in which 
you are interested.
b.	 can be performed using statistical software.
c.	 can identify how frequently a phenomenon has happened in 
the past.
d.	 is not too complicated.
21.  (LO 5)  Assessing the reliability of regression analysis involves
a.	 comparing the mean and median of the dependent variable.
b.	 making sure the model answers the question or purpose of 
the analysis.
c.	 reviewing the model statistics.
d.	 using what-if scenarios.
22.  (LO 5)  In a regression model prepared to predict revenue, which 
of the following is the correct interpretation of an adjusted R-square 
of 0.85? 
a.	 Revenue will increase by 85% next year.
b.	 The independent variables in the model can explain 85% of 
the change in revenue.
c.	 The dependent variable in the model can explain 85% of the 
change in independent variables.
d.	 The adjusted R-square is too small of a number for us to rely 
on the model.
23.  (LO 5)  A spreadsheet model that allows evaluating how changes 
to values and assumptions affect an outcome is called a
a.	 regression equation.
b.	 linear optimization model.
c.	 best guess model.
d.	 what-if analysis.
24.  (LO 5)  Which is the best tool when the desired result is known, 
but not the  input value for a single variable will achieve that result? 
a.	 Goal Seek
b.	 Scenario Manager
c.	 Linear regression
d.	 Data analysis 
Review Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Compare and contrast data exploration with data analysis interpretation.
2.  (LO 1)  Discuss the two overall steps in the process of interpreting a data analysis. 
3.  (LO 2)  When applying the SPARKS critical thinking model to interpreting data analyses, how does 
identifying the stakeholders help interpret that analysis?

Review Questions 
8-41
Assume the role of the preparer of this visualization.
	 1.	 Who are the stakeholders?
	 2.	 What is the purpose of the analysis? 
	 3.	 What applicable knowledge do you need in order to prepare this visualization? 
Then, assume the role of the reviewer of this visualization and answer the following: 
	 4.	 What are the risks when interpreting this visualization? 
	 5.	 What conclusions can be identified from the visualization? 
5.  (LO 2)  Explain why it is important to identify and evaluate alternative explanations of results. 
6.  (LO 3) Discuss what it means to ask “does the analysis make sense?” 
7.  (LO 3) What questions should be asked when evaluating the data and methods of an analysis? 
8.  (LO 3) What questions should be asked when evaluating the results of an analysis? 
9.  (LO 4) Explain what reliability and validity mean in the context of data analysis interpretation. 
10.  (LO 4) Explain the difference between an anomaly and an outlier. 
11.  (LO 5)  Discuss how to evaluate a regression model for validity. 
12.  (LO 5)  Explain how adjusted R-square can be used to evaluate the reliability of a regression model.
13.  (LO 5)  Explain how to interpret whether an independent variable in a regression model is a reli-
able measure of the dependent variable. 
(a) Total sales include merchandise sales, net of expected returns, from our store and digital channels, as well as
     gif card breakage.
(b) The fourth quarter and full year 2017 consisted of 14 weeks and 53 weeks, respectively, compared with 13 weeks
     and 52 weeks in the comparable periods presented.
(c) Beginning with the first quarter 2018, we adopted the new accounting standards for revenue recognition,
     leases, and pensions. We are presenting certain prior period results on a basis consistent with the new standards
      and conformed to the current period presentation. We provided additional information about the impact of the new
     accounting standards on previously reported financial information in a Form 8-K filed on May 11, 2018. 
(d) 2015 sales includes $3,815 million related to our former pharmacy and clinic businesses, which Target sold to
      CVS in December of 2015.
−8.0
1Q
2Q
3Q
Total Sales(a): Percentage Change from Prior Year
4Q
Year
−4.0
0.0
4.0
8.0
12.0
16.0
20.0
24.0
28.0
Percent
2016(c)(d)
2017(b)(c)
2018
2019
2020
3.5 %
11.3 %
(1.1)%
5.1 %
– %
10.0 %
1.8 %
5.7 %
1.4 %
4.7 %
7.0 %
24.8 %
1.6 %
3.6 %
Fiscal Year
2020
2019
2018
2017 (b) (c)
2016 (c) (d)
1Q
2Q
3Q
4Q
3.7 %
3.4 %
(5.8)%
3.6 %
Year
Source: Target’s Consolidated Financial Statements as filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Public Domain.
4.  (LO 2)  The following visualization was published on the Target Investors Relations website.

8-42 
Chapter 8  Interpreting Data Analysis Results 
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
2025
70,000
80,000
90,000 100,000 110,000
Public Works - Utilities
Department
City of Boulder 2025 Accounts Payable by Department
Public Works - Support Svcs
Public Works - Transportation
Parks and Recreation
Open Space & Mountain Parks
NA
Human Services
Community Vitality
Finance
Police
Library
Information Technology
Housing
Fire
Fundwide / Citywide
Climate Initiatives
Arts
PW-Development
City Manager’s Oﬀice
Planning
Transaction Amount ($ in Millions)
Brief Exercises 
	 1.	 The original question for the analysis was “Which department has the highest spending amount 
during year 2025?” Does the analysis answer this question? Why or why not? 
	 2.	 Based on the information from the analysis preparer, was the correct data used in the analysis? Why 
or why not? 
	 3.	 What information in the analysis preparer’s statement allows you to conclude that the results of the 
analysis are accurate? 
BE 8.1  (LO 1) While data exploration and data interpretation are related in the data analysis process, 
there is a distinction between these two activities. Data exploration is about understanding ________, 
whereas data interpretation is about understanding the_____________. 
BE 8.2  (LO 1)  There are steps in the process of reviewing an analysis. The first asks if the analysis makes 
sense, and the second asks if the analysis results are ________ and _____________.
BE 8.3  (LO 1)  Financial Accounting   You are a financial analyst working for the city of Boulder, Col-
orado. Your manager has asked you to review the account payable analysis prepared by the accounts 
payable department. The analysis preparer told you the analysis is intended to determine which Boulder, 
Colorado city department has the highest level of spending in U.S. dollars during the year 2025. The 
analysis was prepared using all the transaction data for the year 2025 for every department. The preparer 
also verified that the total agreed to the appropriate line item for expenditures in the general ledger, and 
that there were no intercompany transactions to eliminate.

Brief Exercises 
8-43
BE 8.4  (LO 2)  Financial Accounting   Managerial Accounting   As a senior financial analyst at 
Super Scooters, you received the following graph from a financial analyst in your department. Your man-
ager would like to know the quantity of units that must be sold for each model before it will have a profit. 
0
Captain
Celeritas
Kicks
Lazer
500
100
Units
Model
806
1,024
607
430
1,452
1,116
1,500
2,000
2023
2024
2025
Break Even Units Per Model and Year
553
858
1,807
392
377
333
The preparer of the graph told you that total sales price, variable costs, and total fixed costs were pulled 
from the accounting information system and that the amounts agreed to the general ledger. They used the 
break-even point formula from the CPA exam to calculate the break-even point in units for each model. 
	 1.	 What accounting and other knowledge would 
you need to obtain or apply in order to appro-
priately interpret the prepared graph or the 
statement made by the preparer? 
	 2.	 Who are the stakeholders for this analysis? 
	 3.	 What is the purpose of the analysis, and does 
the graph answer the question posed by your 
manager? 
BE 8.5  (LO 2)  When considering possible risks of a data analysis, always ask questions about the analysis. 
Match each type of risk to the question that addresses it. Each be used once, more than once, or not at all.  
	 a.	 Potential data risk
	 b.	 Potential analysis risk
	 c.	 Potential bias risk
	 d.	 Potential visualization risk
	 e.	 Potential user risk 
Question
Type of Risk Addressed
	 1.	Did the preparer have any potential biases that could have influenced the preparation of the analysis?
	 2.	Are the data used in the analysis the most recent available? 
	 3.	Were all the necessary and appropriate data included in the analysis? 
	 4.	Were appropriate internal controls in place to ensure the data used was correct? 
	 5.	Was the correct method used to perform the analysis?
	 6.	Is the analysis missing relevant data? 
	 7.	Did the analysis meet the original objective and answer the question? 
BE 8.6  (LO 3)  Match each statement to the appropriate bias to be aware of when interpreting data anal-
yses. Choose from the following biases. Each can be used once or more than once.  
	 a.	 Confirmation bias
	 b.	 Selection bias
Statement
Type of Bias
	 1.	The person performing the analysis wants to prove a predetermined assumption.
	 2.	The person performing the analysis selected the data subjectively. 
	 3.	The person interpreting the analysis wants to prove a predetermined assumption.
	 4.	The person interpreting the analysis focuses on results that support the existing assumption.
	 5.	The person interpreting the analysis considers only a sample of the data rather than the entire population. 
	 6.	The person interpreting the analysis ignores aspects of the analysis that contradicts the existing 
assumption.
