10-18 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
used for stable processes where the steps of the process do not change over time, such as when 
financial analysts download the closing stock prices of the same set of companies every day.
Interactive, real-time performance dashboards are a great example of the value creation pos-
sible from RPA technologies. For example, the objective of a cost accountant for a manufacturing 
plant that produces breakfast cereals is to control product costs. Without RPA, controlling product 
costs might involve two hours daily of performing data analyses on the previous day’s activity. 
RPA technologies could recoup those hours with an automated routine which mines the 
production data every night and displays the results on the next morning’s dashboard. The 
results could be interpreted each morning, which would make factory cost control efforts 
more effective and timely. Illustration 10.14 illustrates a sample production activity dash-
board that can result from implementing RPA.
ILLUSTRATION 10.14  Robotic Process Automation (RPA) Example Dashboard
Total Rejected Products for First Shif
Damaged 96
Defective 88
Others 2
12,785
Workers
26.68%
Recoverable
36,230
Expenses
KPIs for First Shif
Plant
Waste
Process
Waste
Lbs
Change
On
Target
7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00
15:00
14:00
13:00
12:00
Waste Produced-First Shif
0
7k
6k
5k
4k
3k
2k
1k
7:00
8:00
9:00 10:00 11:00
15:00
14:00
13:00
12:00
Robotic Process Automation
KPI met
KPI missed >10%
Quality
Damaged
Defective
Workers
Budgeted 
= 21,639
Actual
5 9
0
0
%

10.2 Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-19
ILLUSTRATION 10.15 
Accounting Tasks that Benefit 
from RPA
Transaction 
Processing
Exception
Incident
Distributions
Performance
and Control
Dashboards
Account 
Maintenance
Employee
Time Records 
for Payroll
Recurring
Adjusting 
Entries
End of Period
Report Generation
Reconciliations
Collection of Public 
Internet Data
Straight-line
Depreciation
Charges
Completion of
Documents
and Forms
RPA
 Process Mining
 Process mining tools measure the timing and flow of data captured as business events 
occur. They help financial, managerial, and tax accountants better evaluate business process 
efficiency and effectiveness. Systems accountants also use process mining tools to evaluate 
AIS risks and control effectiveness. By describing where processes have more exceptions and 
 Professional Insight 10.1:  How Can RPA Be Used in Financial 
Accounting? 
 The summer before the final year of her accounting program, Brigitte completed an internship 
where she gained valuable experience working for a financial analyst. 
 The first half of the summer I was gathering financial statement balances 
and totals for over 400 companies each day so I could calculate and com-
pare 15 financial ratios.  Evaluating these ratio trends over time and comparing 
them to a competitor’s ratios or to the industry average can provide insights about prof-
itability, asset utilization, liquidity, and solvency. 
 About halfway through my internship, my boss suggested I learn how to 
use a routine process automation tool, UiPath, to write a routine to auto-
matically gather the financial data.  My RPA routine opened the SEC data website 
and sequentially entered each company’s code so the financial statement information would 
be displayed. My RPA script would then copy the data and paste it into an Excel worksheet, 
naming the sheet with that company’s code. 
 I then learned how to write the RPA script for the calculation and com-
parison of all the financial ratios. What had previously taken me over 
six hours a day to perform was now running overnight so that I would 
have the information first thing the following morning.  Then, I could criti-
cally evaluate the ratios’ meaning. I feel like my internship was much more valuable after 
automating the routine part of my day and spending my time learning the value of the 
information models I had created. 
Illustration 10.15 summarizes more of the common accounting uses for RPA.

10-20 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
delays, process mining also helps auditors adjust their audit plans to spend more time on the 
accounts and processes that have the greatest risk of financial statement errors and omissions.
Process mining can improve, innovate, or control existing processes:
•	Available data fields are typically extracted, joined, and transformed to create a process log.
•	The process log records what happened where, who was involved, when it happened, and 
can capture which controls were implemented or skipped over.
Let’s illustrate process mining with an example from a manufacturer of superhero figurines. 
Illustration 10.16 depicts the three major events in their sales cycle:
•	The sales department captures the sale and records it in the sales journal.
•	The shipping department ships all sales notifications received from the sales department 
and reduces inventory.
•	Accounts receivable matches sales orders and shipping notifications to create accurate 
invoices, which are sent to the customers.
ILLUSTRATION 10.16  Sales Cycle Example of Process Mining Tests
Capture sale
Superhero 3D Manufacturing
Customer arrives
Sales
Shipping
Accounts
Receivable
Record sale
in sales journal
Match the sales order
and the shipping
notification; create the
invoice and send to
customer
Invoice
Sales Journal
Inventory Subledger
Accounts
Receivable
Subledger
Sales Journal
Record the shipment
to reduce Inventory
1
2
3
The red lines in Illustration 10.16 depict the specific tests to be conducted from the pro-
cess mining, which can be expressed as these questions:
	 1.	 Are all sales captured reflected in the sales journal? What is the time delay between the 
capture and the recording of these sales? 
	 2.	 Are all sales captured in the sales journal shipped? What is the time delay between the 
sales capture and the shipment to the customer? Are all shipments recorded as reductions 
in the inventory subledger? Are there any sales journal entries that are made and not 
shipped in the same accounting period? (GAAP rules state that revenue cannot be recog-
nized until the sales transaction has been fulfilled.)
	 3.	 Do all invoices get posted to the accounts receivable subledger? How often and by how 
much are the sales journal entries different than the invoices? What is the time delay 
between the shipment and the invoice mailing to the customer?
The results may show that some captured sales are never shipped or do not ship in a timely 
fashion. Alternatively, there may be shipments that never turn into invoices, resulting in lost 
inventory. Finally, there may be differences between what is recorded in the sales journal 
and what invoice data is posted to the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger. To quickly show 

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-21
where and when the data variance happens for each of these questions, we could present pro-
cess mining results as dashboard dials, as data tables, or as data visualizations.
Process mining results may also reveal violation of authorization or segregation of duties 
controls, such as the sales department both authorizing the sales capture and recording the 
sales journal entries. This insight would lead to changing the process so that accounts receiv-
able is recording all sales transactions and sales events would not be recorded until after ship-
ping and invoicing.
Two other examples help illustrate the value provided by process mining. In the AIS practice 
area, analyzing system access logs with process mining can ensure that system access for termi-
nated employees is revoked in a timely manner. In managerial accounting, process mining can 
identify bottlenecks in business processes and establish relevant activity bases for activity-based 
costing systems. These examples document how process mining helps improve the internal con-
trols over the accounting systems, reducing audit risk for both internal and external auditors.
Continuous Auditing
Have you ever wondered why auditors wait until after the year-end to perform their journal and 
ledger data tests under tremendous time pressure? Or why they use data sampling techniques 
to infer whether ledger balances are reasonable rather than evaluating the population of data?
Continuous auditing technologies are programmed modules embedded in an organi-
zation’s AIS that evaluate transactions as they occur throughout the year:
•	Routine transactions are typically captured and tested in automated routines for consis-
tent processing.
•	If transactions do not pass the tests to be categorized as a routine transaction, they are usu-
ally copied to an exception file to be evaluated by the external auditors at year end. Exam-
ples of these exceptions are invoice totals that are too high or too low for what has been 
sold or payroll cash disbursements which do not match up to an authorized employee.
This testing of the entire population of transactions helps auditors develop a more accurate 
assessment of the risks inherent to amounts reported on the financial statements. ­Continuous 
auditing tools reduce the workload at year end and provide faster audits with higher ­quality. 
Illustration 10.17 illustrates continuous auditing modules employed at end of quarter 
throughout the year.
ILLUSTRATION 10.17  Quarterly Continuous Auditing Throughout the Year
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Most of the audit tests on internal controls and routine transactions
can be completed during the year using automated tests of transactions
and verification of the eﬀectiveness of internal controls.
Audit is completed at year end
on non-routine, adjusting, and
closing entries, testing
management assumptions and
estimations, and confirming
year-end balances.
Data is tested
Data is tested
Data is tested
Data is tested
The first users of continuous auditing were large banks and credit card companies. Both 
industries have millions of transactions occurring every day, which create a high data volume 
that is difficult to confidently sample by year end. More recently, companies in extractive and 
manufacturing industries have joined auditors in embracing continuous auditing technolo-
gies to support their internal applications.
Continuous auditing technologies also make audits more proactive rather than reactive. 
Accounting record issues and errors can be evaluated and corrected when they occur, increas-
ing the integrity and reliability of internal data gathered after those corrections are made:
•	Evaluating emerging data patterns earlier in the year can identify new tax strategies or 
areas where more internal controls are needed.
•	Logging unusual internet use data points can identify cybersecurity risks earlier, which 
means that controls can be implemented.

10-22
CHAPTER 10 Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
•  Automated evaluation of routine transaction data frees auditors to focus time and energy 
on audit process steps that contain more financial statement risk. 
 Tests of revenue recognition, inventory valuation, and cash flows are a few examples of areas 
where both internal and external auditors are using continuous auditing. 
 Textual Analysis
 Textual analysis tools analyze word choices in footnotes, investor communications, blogs, 
social media postings, and other documentation, such as contract language for revenue rec-
ognition treatment.  Textual mining tools evaluate word choice and usage to reveal insights 
about honesty, transparency, intent, and sentiments in communications by management, 
elected officials, and customers. Text counts and text patterns can be coded into categories of 
meaning, which are then analyzed along with numerical data for insights. 
These tools make harvesting data efficient from sources such as financial footnotes and 
management emails to online customer feedback. Textual analysis can generate business 
intelligence, audit intelligence, and tax planning value. There are a few examples of text min-
ing sources in the accounting profession:
•  Lease contract language 
•  Annual reports, financial statement footnotes, and 10K or 10Q filings 
•  xBRL text data fields 
•  Auditor letters and reports 
•  Investor relation press releases 
•  Correspondence from regulators 
•  Tax planning and response letters 
 We can also use textual analysis on formal and informal social media communications by 
analysts, auditors, and regulators to categorize the favorability or pessimism in those commu-
nications ( Illustration 10.18 ). 
 ILLUSTRATION 10.18  Optimistic and Pessimistic 
Word Categories: Annual Report Examples 
Applaud
Favorable
Successful
Positive
Optimistic Terms
Bleak
Costly
Troubled
Unstable
Pessimistic Terms
 Diligent Institute is the leading technology solution designed to improve board of direc-
tors’ fiduciary responsibilities to oversee management decisions. They create financial and 
textual analysis dashboard visualizations to focus board members’ attention on the areas of 
the organization with the greatest risks. For example, they have used textual analysis to show

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-23
Textual analysis that evaluates the use of passive versus active verbs and the ratio of pos-
itive words to negative words, often called the polarity of the communication, helps to cate-
gorize communications. These categories can then be analyzed in combination with financial 
statement totals or ratios to better predict future earnings, bankruptcy risk, or stock prices.
Cognitive Technologies
If you have interacted with Apple devices, then you have witnessed the power of Siri, the vir-
tual assistant feature of Apple’s operating system. Siri is a user-friendly artificial intelligence 
tool programmed to answer most questions and research requests. Cognitive technologies 
are artificial intelligence technologies that use a human expert judgment mimicking internal 
algorithm. Accountants typically use AIS data to train their models for accuracy for diagnos-
ing and predicting objectives, and then adjust their model as new data is added. Cognitive 
technologies are used in many fields, including training, production, farming, banking, retail, 
healthcare, tourism, and utilities, and in a variety of business functions within organizations. 
They can range from simplistic decision models to dynamic, complex models.
Complex cognitive tools are also called artificial neural networks, machine learning, and 
expert systems. These models are programmed to accurately perform data classification tasks 
for diagnostic or prediction objectives. For the model to be accurate, the underlying phenom-
ena variables should behave in stable or consistent patterns.
Cognitive technology tools perform best in stable environments because they use old 
data to define a complex mathematical algorithm which will, over time, produce an expert 
ILLUSTRATION 10.19  Diligent Institute’s Board Member Sentiment Tracker
Source: www.diligentinstitute.com/sentiment-tracker/
corporate board members’ sentiment rating over time. These results show how optimistic cor-
porate board members are about the upcoming opportunities and performance possibilities in 
their organizations (Illustration 10.19).
