Exercises 
10-51
EX 10.4  (LO 1)  Managerial Accounting   Data Characteristics You are the managerial accountant for 
a national chain fitness company that owns several gyms and health food stores in populated locations. Your 
company also offers nutrition and personal training services. You have been asked to analyze sales revenues 
and cost of goods sold by comparing this year to the prior year. Your data strategy is to analyze the following 
data fields and measures. For each, discuss its data characteristics in terms of data volume, variety, velocity, 
veracity, and value.
	 1.	 The quantity of products sold in the health food stores.
	 2.	 The number of memberships sold each month.
	 3.	 The percentage of members who book appointments with nutrition or personal training professionals.
	 4.	 Member evaluations about experiences with nutritional or personal training professionals, including 
star ratings and comments.
EX 10.5 (LO 2)  Accounting Information Systems   Robotic Process Automation Your company 
asked you to automate the process of performing the three-way match control in the expenditure cycle. 
­Currently, the AP clerk manually matches the vendor’s name, quantity, and price between the vendor 
invoice, the purchase order, and the receiving report. This manual process takes the AP clerk all day, leaving 
no time to perform other tasks. Discuss how RPA can automate this internal control to reduce the hours 
engaged in this task.
EX 10.6  (LO 2)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Textual Analysis You work in the corporate office 
of Sassy Seasonings, a large restaurant chain. The operations team has implemented new kitchen man-
agement policies at its most popular location. To understand whether these policies have improved cus-
tomer satisfaction over time, the manager asks you to analyze data collected as part of the customer 
satisfaction survey. This data contains the date of the review and the customers’ food and service ratings.
	 1.	 Classify the customer’s food rating key words into one of three groups: 1. Good, 2. Average, and 
3. Poor. 
(Hint: First, sort the Customer Food Rating in alphabetical order by selecting all the data, not the 
headers, and checking the box for Headers in the Data. Then, create a new column for these food 
rating groups and manually code each row by typing one of the categories for each group: “1. Good”, 
“2. Average”, or “3. Poor” in the new column. Critical thinking tip: all coders have their own per-
sonal bias, so your coding may differ from others. A good control would be to have more than one 
coder and to analyze inter-coder reliability).
	 2.	 Create a frequency distribution table using the COUNTIF function in Excel.
(Hint: Starting in cell G3, use the COUNTIF function to total each food rating into one of the three 
categories, such as =COUNTIF(D3:D91,“1. Good”). Create a total row to show the total number of 
customer food ratings by category.)
	 3.	 Next, create another frequency distribution table by month for each of the customer food rating 
categories. Create a pivot table on a new worksheet (name the worksheet “Frequency Table”), select 
the food rating groups as both rows and values, and then select Months as columns. Format the 
resulting table as necessary with column width changes.
	 4.	 Finally, create a line chart where months is on the x-axis and count of each rating is on the y-axis. 
(Hint: Create a pivot chart line graph using the frequency distribution table from question part 3. 
Select the pivot table rows where the Jan, Feb, and March data resides for columns A-E (Not the 
blue shaded header and Grand Total rows.) Then, create the line chart. You may need to switch the 
row/columns to present the months on the x-axis. Make any other formatting edits. Save the file.)
	 5.	 Based on your analyses, did the kitchen management policies implemented by your operations 
manager improve customer food ratings over these months?

10-52 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
EX 10.7  (LO 2)  Data   Financial Accounting   Process Automation You are a financial accountant 
for Water Sports, Inc. Every month you create comparative income statements for your product lines in 
the U.S. GAAP format, a repeated process which consumes much of your time. You have decided to use 
process automation in Alteryx to generate comparative income statements faster and more efficiently.
	 1.	 Create a workflow in Alteryx to automate the process of creating comparative income statements 
with the following rows:
•  Sales Revenues
•  Less Cost of Goods Sold
•  = Gross Profit
•  Less Selling and Administrative Expenses
•  = Net Income
	 2.	 What is your interpretation of your analysis results? How would your interpretation be different if 
some of your production was not sold and still in ending inventory?
(Hint: Refer to How To 10.2 for the steps to create the workflow in Alteryx. Some of the Alteryx new 
columns and their formulas will be different from How To 10.2. For example, new columns include cost 
of goods sold rather than contribution margin, selling and administrative expenses rather than traceable 
fixed expenses, segment margin, and common fixed expenses. Assume that all variable costs and the 
traceable fixed costs are production costs that flow through inventory to cost of goods sold and that the 
common fixed costs are all selling and administrative expenses. Finally, assume that all products are sold 
in the period that they are produced and there are no ending inventory.)
EX 10.8  (LO 2)  Data   Auditing   Financial Accounting   Robotic Process Automation Your cli-
ent, OneStopShop, Inc., is a public company with six independent business divisions: floor cleaning; lawn 
care; pest control; household cleaning; corporate office cleaning; and plumbing products. Your manager 
has asked you to calculate the following financial ratios for each of the divisions and compare their values 
between the current and previous years:
•  Return on assets (net income / average total assets)
•  Profit margin (net income / sales)
•  Asset turnover (sales/ average total assets)
•  Current ratio (current assets / current liabilities)
The client has provided a data set with select income statement and balance sheet data for each division. 
Because this is a task that you are likely to perform for other engagements, you decide to build a macro in 
Excel to calculate these financial statement ratios. Record a macro for the floor cleaning division. Then, 
run this macro on each of the divisions to calculate the ratios for the remaining divisions.
EX 10.9  (LO 2)  Financial Accounting   Blockchain Technologies You are a financial accountant in 
a large retail company whose supply chain partners want to use blockchain technologies to record all 
transactions. Explain the financial reporting benefits from using blockchain technology and factors that 
need to be considered for this decision.
EX 10.10  (LO 2, 3)  Auditing   Accounting Information Systems   Technology Developments 
You are a systems accountant working with your company’s internal auditor to analyze the compliance 
of your company’s authorized purchase credit card (e.g., “P-card”) transactions with company policies. 
A new analysis technology helps you easily identify the spending transactions by several employees that 
do not comply with the policies. Explain which technology development described in the chapter would 
best help you find and document where controls in the P-card process either must be improved or added 
to prevent these unauthorized transactions.
EX 10.11  (LO 2, 3)  Financial Accounting   Technology Developments You work for an investment 
manager who asks you to retrieve a large portfolio of different companies’ closing stock market prices 
each trading day. Which data analysis technology would make this daily task more efficient?
EX 10.12  (LO 2, 3)  Data   Auditing   Financial Accounting   Textual Analysis As the external 
auditor for a computer manufacturing client, you are asked to examine the company’s warranty expense 
and related accrual adjusting entry for GAAP compliance in valuation calculations. The client provided 
the following summary of warranty expense related data from the prior year (audited) and the current 
year (unaudited).
F/S
Income
Statement
Warranty
Warranty
Expense
Liability
32153
23829
$ 347,954
$ 121,784
$ 535,849
$ 241,132
$ (187,895)
$ (119,348)
–35%
–49%
Account
Balance Sheet
Account
AcctNo AcctDescription 6/30/2025 6/30/2024
Diﬀerence
%Change

Professional Application Case: Adventure Sports 
10-53
Both the warranty expense and warranty liability decreased significantly compared to the prior year. 
You asked your client’s financial accountant why there was such a drastic decrease in the expense and 
liability. The accountant responded,  “We have had significant increases in product quality and therefore 
we don’t have a lot of warranty claims these days. Customers are happier.” 
The objective was finding evidence to support or deny this explanation, so you obtained customer 
satisfaction text data about the computers from social media postings. You planned to perform textual 
analysis regarding whether there was an increase in positive customer sentiment about the computer 
product quality. 
 1. Classify the customer comments into three groups: 1 = low quality, 2 = neutral, and 3 = high quality. 
(Hint: Sort the product ratings or customer comments in alphabetical order to make it easier to 
assign categories to each comment. Use the COUNTIF function to total each comment into one of 
the three groups. Critical thinking note: Your coding may disagree with other coders, and you might 
be inconsistent within your own coding.)
2. Create a frequency distribution table that shows the total number of customer comments by group,
by month, and in total for each of the customer comment groups.
(Hint: Transform the date column into months from the Home menu. In the Number section, select 
Custom formatting, then type “mmm” in the type (no quotes). This does not change the date data, 
just its presentation, preserving your original dates. Then, create a pivot table using your groups as 
rows and values and months as columns.)
3. Create two time series visualizations to determine if customer sentiments about their computer 
products are improving or not. One visualization should use customer text comments and the other 
their product ratings. 
 4. Interpret these results and determine if any further audit steps are necessary to properly estimate 
the warranty expense and related accrual for the first six months. Suggest internal controls for the 
critical thinking risks mentioned in question 1. 
 Professional Application Case: Adventure Sports 
PurchaseOrder
PONo
PODate
POItemID
POItemDescription
POItemCost
POItemQty
POExpectedPreceiptDate
VendorID
VendorName
Invoices
InvoiceNO
PONo
VendorID
VendorName
ItemID
ItemDescription
InvoiceQty
InvoiceItemCost
InvoiceTotal
ReceivingReport
RECNO 
PONo
VendorID
VendorName
ItemID
ItemDescription
RecItemQty
RecDate
VendorMasterFile
VendorID
VendorName
VendorAddress
VendorCity
VendorState
VendorZip
VendorPayterms
 Adventure Sports is a new chain of retail stores with both online and brick-and-mortar locations. They 
sell a variety of outdoor activity and sports products ranging from water sports to mountaineering and 
camping. The company is growing quickly, currently operating ten stores across five states. These stores 
are supplied with products from a distribution center that receives all its purchased products from ven-
dors. Online sales are processed out of Adventure Sports’ distribution center. The brick-and-mortar stores 
focus on high-quality customer service and offer classes for new outdoor sports enthusiasts. The com-
pany has developed strong relationships with its vendors and its customers. Customers tend to return to 
the stores, demonstrating significant customer loyalty. 
 Because Adventure Sports is growing so quickly, they want to automate more inventory purchasing 
processes to make them more efficient and effective, with better internal controls. What follows is an 
entity-relationship diagram (ERD) showing the tables and variables involved in the process.

10-54 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
PAC 10.1  Accounting Information Systems: Use Process Automation for Accounts Payable
Data   Accounting Information Systems   You are the systems accountant reviewing the accounts 
payable process to approve vendor invoices for payment. Currently, the process requires manual match-
ing between the invoice, receiving report, and purchase order to approve the invoice for payment. You 
have interviewed the AP clerk and the financial accountant and noted that to approve an invoice for 
payment, the following conditions must be met:
•	 The invoice data must match the data included on the purchase order including, VendorID, ItemID, 
and Quantity. 
•	 The invoice data must match the data included on the receiving report including VendorID, ItemID, 
and Quantity 
Use Alteryx to build a workflow that results in two outputs: a file that is “Okay to Pay” invoices and a file 
that is “Exceptions.”
PAC 10.2  Auditing: Continuous Auditing of Company Purchases
Auditing   You are an audit senior on the Adventure Sports’ annual audit. Your audit manager has asked 
you to develop a plan for the engagement team to use continuous audit methodologies to reduce the 
amount of audit work and testing performed at year-end. Your assigned audit area is the order-to-pay 
cycle. Draft a memo for the audit files discussing continuous auditing and outlining your plan for contin-
uous monitoring of the purchasing data for your client.
PAC 10.3  Financial Accounting: Automate Procedures for Approving Vendor Payments
Data   Financial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   You are a financial accountant 
for Adventure Sports. Currently, your process for approving vendor invoices for payment is matching the 
hardcopy invoice from the vendor to the relevant purchase order and receiving data in the AIS:
•	 Purchase orders are keyed into the AIS in the PurchaseOrder table by the purchasing group after 
they are sent to the vendor.
•	 Receiving report data is keyed into the AIS in the receiving department after items are received by 
the vendor.
•	 Upon receipt of a vendor invoice, the invoice is keyed into the AIS VendorInvoices table and filed 
by due date in the hardcopy file in the AP clerk’s office.
•	 Daily, the AP clerk pulls the invoices that are due within the next few days and performs the 
following:
Step 1: For each invoice, the AP clerk looks up the corresponding PO number to the PO in the Pur-
chaseOrders table. The AP clerk verifies that the quantity purchased was the quantity invoiced. If 
the quantities agree within a 2% tolerance level, then the AP clerk moves to the next step.
Step 2: For each invoice, the AP clerk looks up the PO number that corresponds to the PO number 
in the ReceivingReport table. The AP clerk verifies that the quantity received was the quantity 
invoiced. If the quantities agree within a 2% tolerance level, then the clerk moves to the next step.
Step 3: For each invoice that passes step 1 and 2, the AP clerk stamps “Okay to Pay” on the invoice 
and adds it to the Ok to Pay list, which is sent to the treasurer who prepares, signs, and sends 
checks.
	 1.	 Match and compare the quantities from the purchase orders, the receiving reports, and the vendor 
invoices. The matched invoice information within the 2% quantity deviation tolerance should be 
labeled as “Okay to Pay.” Any invoices above the 2% quantity deviation should be labeled “Excep-
tion” so the AP clerk can follow up with the vendor. 
	 2.	 Discuss the benefits of using Excel to increase efficiencies and potentially reduce errors in the 
approval of vendor invoices.
PAC 10.4  Managerial Accounting: Create a Vendor Performance Dashboard
Data   Managerial Accounting   Accounting Information Systems   As a managerial accountant 
for Adventure Sports, you want to know if there are patterns in the purchasing data. Create a visualiza-
tion dashboard to to measure the following metrics related to vendor purchases:
•	 The count of purchase orders for each vendor during this period.
•	 The percentage of purchase costs incurred during this period by vendor.
•	 The percentage of purchase costs incurred by product.

Le Grind Continuing Case: Prepare Gross Profit Data With an Alteryx Workflow
Data
Visit Wiley’s online learning platform for the case background, additional questions, data, and 
more information about the continuing case. 
Le Grind Continuing Case: Prepare Gross Profit Data With an Alteryx Workflow
10-55
PAC 10.5 Tax Accounting: Explain Robotic Process Automation for Current Tax Rates
Tax Accounting
Currently the data needed to complete the corporate tax return comes from several 
different data sources. Each month you download the data into Excel spreadsheets and use the Excel 
spreadsheet to complete the tax accrual analysis.  Discuss how technology might be used to automate 
this process. Are there other technologies that Adventure Sports should consider for use in the tax 
department? 
