10-46 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
note that Excel formatted the results as currency, while Alteryx did not. However, Alteryx 
provides valuable benefits over Excel:
•	 The Alteryx workflow documents and explains the data preparation and information mod-
eling processes step by step. The steps and their order in Excel were not documented.
•	 Alteryx clearly names and defines the calculated data fields used as calculated field variables.
•	 Alteryx workflows are excellent documentation for auditors, and are effective training tools 
for employees. They also can be rerun with the same data or different data, such as the next 
period’s inputs.
•	 New workflow icons can be easily added as branching off from any of the original work-
flow icons, and new icons can be added to the end of the existing workflow.
•	 Most accountants find it very easy to pick up, understand, and use another person’s Alteryx 
workflows. This is not true of Excel.
Regardless of whether the comparative income statements were created with Excel or Alteryx, 
the resulting insights are valuable when deciding whether to drop a product line. We can con-
clude with confidence that this data have great data veracity and value for our objective.
Multiple Choice Questions
1.  (LO 1)  Anderson hypothesized there would be a direct relationship 
between his customers’ sales volume and the positive tone in their 
product satisfaction survey comments. The analysis he would perform 
to compare the number of units sold and textual data would have high
a.	 data variety.
b.	 data volume.
c.	 data veracity.
d.	 data value.
2.  (LO 1)  Nicolas is a financial accountant for a global company that 
daily processes millions of purchases from thousands of vendors. As 
he prepares the accounts payable records for the external auditors, he 
is interested in the ending accounts payable’s data
a.	 veracity.
b.	 value.
c.	 variety.
d.	 velocity.
3.  (LO 1)  XYM, Inc. wants to change from in-house servers to using 
cloud service providers to increase their data storage capacity. This is 
likely due to high
a.	 data value.
b.	 data veracity.
c.	 data volume.
d.	 data variety.
4.  (LO 1)  Elizabeth was asked to analyze how many Facebook stories 
refer to her company. The unstructured textual data she will be ana-
lyzing has high
a.	 data volume.
b.	 data variety.
c.	 data velocity.
d.	 data value.
5.  (LO 1)  Which of the following is not likely a resource for a profes-
sional to stay up-to-date regarding data privacy regulation?
a.	 The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR)
b.	 United States’ Health Information Privacy Protection Act and the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
c.	 California’s Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
d.	 The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX)
6.  (LO 1)  When the results of data analysis do not provide significant 
business intelligence to an organization, the data is not considered 
to have
a.	 data volume.
b.	 data value.
c.	 data variety.
d.	 data veracity.
7.  (LO 2)  Which of the following presents the correct order of the 
data analyses value creation chain?
a.	 Data analysis, new intelligence, strategy shifts, value creation.
b.	 New intelligence, data analysis, strategy shifts, value creation
c.	 Value creation, strategy shifts, data analysis, new intelligence
d.	 Data analysis, data mining, data processing, data textual anal-
ysis, value creation
8.  (LO 2)  The analysis stage of the data analytics process is currently 
enhanced by
a.	 greater variety of data and combinations of data types.
b.	 new accounting regulations.
c.	 financial statement totals.
d.	 comparison to last year’s results.
9.  (LO 2)  Data mining techniques are being used by the profession to
a.	 determine the purpose of data analysis.
b.	 prepare the data for data analysis.
c.	 prepare the data and explore the data further.
d.	 communicate the data analysis findings to stakeholders.
Data   The Data tag appears when the data required to answer a question or complete an 
exercise are available on Wiley’s online learning platform. 

Review Questions 
10-47
10.  (LO 2)  Cognitive technologies include each of the following 
except for
a.	 artificial neural networks.
b.	 data mining.
c.	 machine learning.
d.	 classification of accounts receivables’ collectability.
11.  (LO 2)  Continuous auditing involves
a.	 auditors being present at the client’s office year-round.
b.	 performing the same audit procedures each year end.
c.	 embedded software modules that capture test transactions as 
they occur.
d.	 None of these answer choices are correct.
12.  (LO 2)  Blockchain technologies are being heavily utilized for 
which of the following?
a.	 Smart contracts helping revenue recognition and lease 
documentation.
b.	 Estimation of bad debts.
c.	 Accumulated depreciation schedules.
d.	 Performance dashboard metrics.
13.  (LO 3)  AIS professionals are most likely responsible for perform-
ing data analyses to gain insight in which of the following?
a.	 The value the accounting system provides to the organiza-
tion’s internal users and recipients of information outputs.
b.	 The value the data in the system provides to creditors through 
the financial statements.
c.	 The value the data in the system provides to investors through 
the financial reporting system.
d.	 The value the data in the system provides to external auditors.
14.  (LO 3)  Auditors are embracing new data analyses options in all of 
the following areas except
a.	 classifying unusual transactions using cognitive technologies.
b.	 performing risk assessments with process mining technologies.
c.	 testing transactions with data mining technologies.
d.	 creating automatic performance reports for client management.
15  (LO 3)  Which of the following summarizes why managerial 
accountants have quickly embraced new data and analyses options?
a.	 They are subject to regulatory restrictions.
b.	 They have a long, innovative tradition of using interdisciplin-
ary data for problem solving and to identify opportunities. 
c.	 They are employees of the company.
d.	 They evaluate trends in financial balances over time.
16.  (LO 3)  Tax accountants are using emerging analysis technologies 
for which of the following?
a.	 Optimizing international transfer pricing choices.
b.	 Determining applicable tax rates.
c.	 Documenting property tax responsibilities.
d.	 Outlining responsibilities in the engagement letter with their 
clients.
1.  (LO 1)  Describe data variety, and give two examples of structured 
data and unstructured data.
2.  (LO 1)  Discuss why professionals are increasingly including 
unstructured data in their analyses. Provide an example of data anal-
ysis incorporating unstructured data.
3.  (LO 1)  Describe data veracity and discuss why it is important for 
data analysis.
4.  (LO 1)  What is data velocity? Provide examples of sources that 
generate internal and external high velocity data.
5.  (LO 1)  Explain the challenges organizations face due to the 
increasing rate of growth in organizational data. How are organiza-
tions responding to these challenges?
6.  (LO 1)  Discuss the importance of analyzing data with high data 
value.
7.  (LO 1)  Identify and describe the three types of data clouds.
8.  (LO 2, 3)  Explain the data analyses value creation chain. Provide 
an example highlighting the four aspects of the value creation chain.
9.  (LO 2)  What is the goal of process mining? Provide an example of 
how accountants are using process mining.
10.  (LO 2)  Describe the benefits of continuous auditing processes.
11.  (LO 2)  What are some of the benefits of blockchain technologies? 
What is an example of blockchain use in accounting?
12.  (LO 3)  Discuss how cognitive technologies are used by tax profes-
sionals to generate insights.
13.  (LO 3)  How have new data and technology options motivated 
systems accountants to consider alternative ways to evaluate AIS 
performance?
14.  (LO 1, 3)  Discuss the importance of managerial accoun-
tants considering data veracity as they perform data analysis for 
decision-making.
15.  (LO 3)  Identify examples of how new data and analyses technolo-
gies are adding value to professionals in financial accounting.
Review Questions

10-48 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Brief Exercises
BE 10.1  (LO 1)  Accounting Information Systems   You are a mem­ber of the AIS steering committee 
for your organization. The committee is deciding between several types of cloud data service options. What 
factors might help you choose the cloud data service that will best serve the needs of your organization?
BE 10.2  (LO 1)  Tax Accounting   Assume you are a senior tax accountant for U.S. Outdoor Adven-
tures, a company with sales operations in 15 states. Your tax analyst has provided you with analysis 
results to support the company’s annual sales tax compliance for each sales tax jurisdiction. You notice 
that the internal data used in the analysis only includes eight months of the year. With respect to data 
veracity, how can using eight months of data impact the conclusions reached in the analysis?
BE 10.3  (LO 1)  For each statement, indicate which data characteristic it best describes: volume, variety, 
velocity, veracity, and value.
	 1.	 Susan, an audit staff member, performed an analysis whereby she combined comments from 
customers’ reviews with warranty expenses for the period. This analysis is an example of data 
_____________.
	 2.	 Parker verified that he had a complete download of all accounts receivable activity data before he 
calculated the AR aging at the end of the period. Having complete data is an example of considering 
data _____________.
	 3.	 Jerome collected hourly temperature data outside his ice cream store to determine if there is a rela-
tionship between temperature and ice cream sales. Temperature data collected hourly each day is an 
example of data _____________.
	 4.	 Janel’s company has decided to move from in-house servers to cloud-based servers due to the 
amount of data that the company is collecting and storing. Movement to cloud-based data storage 
will address the company’s concerns related to data _____________.
BE 10.4  (LO 2)  Match each statement to its related term. Each term can be used once, more than once, 
or not at all.
	 a.	 Data mining
	 b.	 Smart contracts
	 c.	 Robotic process automation
	 d.	 Process mining
	 e.	 Continuous auditing
	 f.	 Textual analysis
Statement
Term
	 1.	When the client’s weekly payroll journal entry value was outside the 
defined terms of normal authorized activity, the audit manager reviewed an 
automatically generated report.
	 2.	The financial accountant obtained an electronic file of the organization’s 
press releases and related investor comments. The accountant analyzes 
the pessimistic and optimistic words to understand sentiment around the 
company’s annual performance.
	 3.	The operations accounting manager reviewed an event log that documented 
how much time it takes to complete operational steps in sales, shipping, and 
sending invoices to customers.
	 4.	The tax accountant analyzed their client’s online blog discussions to assess 
risk of tax evasion.
BE 10.5  (LO 2)  Managerial Accounting   A managerial accountant analyzed production data to iden-
tify a product line that could realize cost savings if changes were made to its production strategies. The 
operations team implemented several changes to the product’s production line, ultimately leading to costs 
savings for the manufacturing facility and product. Map these activities into the data analysis value chain 
for production efficiency. Link the following statements to the appropriate elements in the value chain.
	 a.	 Implement production modifications
	 b.	 Analysis of production data
	 c.	 Increase production efficiency
	 d.	 Identify production cost inefficiencies
4. Value
Creation
1. Data
Analysis
2. New
Intelligence
3. Strategy
Shifs

Brief Exercises 
10-49
BE 10.6  (LO 2, 3)  Match each statement to the most appropriate professional practice area. Each prac-
tice area can be used once, more than once, or not at all.
	 a.	 Accounting information systems 
	 b.	 Auditing
	 c.	 Financial accounting 
	 d.	 Managerial accounting 
	 e.	 Tax accounting
Statement
Practice Area
	 1.	Steven engaged in data mining as part of the risk assessment process to 
determine if there were concerning patterns in his client’s sales cycle data.
	 2.	Chi used process mining to examine systems delays and errors. Her analysis 
results help identify new policies to optimize the system functionality.
	 3.	Wynn used textual analysis tools to better classify his company’s multi-
jurisdictional transactions for compliance with new tax laws.
	 4.	Henry employs smart contracts for all new leases made by his company. The 
smart contracts will improve GAAP lease classifications and revenue recognition.
	 5.	Jamal automated the process of calculating depreciation expense for his 
company’s fixed assets by creating an Excel macro. He runs this macro at the 
end of each month to create his adjusting entry to record depreciation expense.
	 6.	John used textual analysis software to identify sentiment in his client’s press 
releases. His goal is to identify additional risks of material misstatements in 
his client’s financial statements.
BE 10.7  (LO 2, 3)  Match each statement to the technology that the accounting professional will most likely 
choose to use. Each technology term can be used once, more than once, or not at all:
	 a.	 Data mining
	 b.	 Smart contracts
	 c.	 Robotic process automation
	 d.	 Process mining
	 e.	 Continuous auditing
	 f.	 Textual analysis
	 g.	 Cognitive technologies
Statement
Technology
	 1.	A managerial accountant analyzes the comments made by customers 
when they return a product to identify where improvements can be 
made to return policy and procedures.
	 2.	An audit staff member examines sales returns data for the objective of 
discovering patterns among product type or delivery timing.
	 3.	To reduce processing time costs, the accounts payable (AP) manager 
wants the system to electronically match vendor invoices with their 
associated purchase orders and receiving reports instead of the current 
matching process performed by the AP clerk.
	 4.	An internal auditor examines patterns in employee reimbursements 
related to travel to identify unusual expenses.
BE 10.8  (LO 2, 3)  Managerial Accounting   A restaurant chain’s managerial accountant gathers data 
from customers’ mobile device take-out orders. List several ethical implications associated with the 
restaurant using and selling this data.

10-50 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Exercises
EX 10.1  (LO 1)  Accounting Information Systems   Cloud-Based Data Storage Assume you are an 
accounting information systems accountant at a healthcare company that prioritizes data ethics. Your com-
pany collects personally identifiable information about patients and providers, including data that is pro-
tected under The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). The company has 
grown recently due to acquisitions of physician practice groups, which increased the types and number of 
medical procedures performed. As a result, data volume has increased, and your company has decided that 
cloud-based storage will best serve the future data needs of the company.
Two vendors are finalists to provide that cloud-based storage. One vendor, PrivacyConcept, Inc. is 
offering a private cloud to host your company’s data storage needs. A second vendor, SkyHighStorage, is 
offering a public cloud with appropriate internal controls to separate your company’s data from its other 
customer’s data. Write a memo to the CIO (Chief Information Officer) outlining the relevant data ethics 
considerations when using cloud services and for deciding between the two vendors.
EX 10.2  (LO 1)  Data   Managerial Accounting   Comparative In­come Statement and Data Value 
You are a managerial accountant for Water Sports, Inc., a manufacturer of inflatable and hard SUPS 
(stand up paddle boards). The VP of Operations is wondering whether Water Sports should drop an inflat-
able product line that has a net-loss performance. She has asked you to prepare a comparative income 
statement for two products–SUP Model SX (10’6” inflatable) and SUP Model FW (11’ inflatable).
	 1.	 Create a comparative income statement for these two products.
	 2.	 Would eliminating one of the SUP models increase the company’s profitability? Why or why not?
	 3.	 Consider the data value of the data set used in this analysis. What alternative analyses could you 
consider to address if you should drop a net-loss producing product?
EX 10.3  (LO 1)  Auditing   Data Ethics As an external auditor for a large public company client, your 
engagement team has implemented continuous audit modules into your client’s AIS. These modules test 
and collect evidence of sales revenues transactions during the current year. Your engagement partner 
has asked you to draft a memo for the audit file to document the continuous auditing process steps, as 
well as the professional due care that will be taken, to keep the client’s collected sales data confidential. 
An incomplete draft of the memo that is missing important components follows. Complete the memo 
when more information is needed.
March 15, 20XX
Memo for the Audit Files
RE: Continuous Audit of Revenue Data & Professional Due Care Considerations
This memo documents the engagement team’s procedures to provide reasonable assurance 
regarding the client’s revenue-cycle transactions and the engagement team’s procedures to 
ensure that the client’s data is kept confidential. First, we discuss the audit procedures and 
second, we discuss professional due care considerations.
Continuous Audit of Revenue Procedures
The client has provided us access to all sales transaction data in real-time by allowing the audit 
firm to connect its proprietary analytics software to the company’s relational database. As reve-
nue transactions are recorded in the client’s database, the auditor’s software automatically tests 
and captures the audit data.
We performed audit procedures on this data throughout the year, including the following 
descriptive statistics and diagnostic tests: 
1. 
Based on these descriptive and diagnostic tests, and comparing our results to past years, abnor-
mal transactions or anomaly transactions were identified and further investigated by collect-
ing and reviewing their related source documents, such as contracts, invoices, and customer 
payments.
Professional Due Care Considerations
Since sales and collection transactions have a high data volume of personally identifiable data, 
great care must be taken to ensure that the client’s data is kept private. 
For example, 2. 
