10-12 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments 
are Accountants Adopting?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➋
Explain how technology developments are impacting data analysis in accounting.
Accountants can efficiently analyze more data than ever before by using established analysis 
tools such as Excel, as well as recently developed tools powerful enough to process a variety 
of data and at higher volume. In addition to tremendous analysis power, these tools have 
advanced visualization features that are improving how accountants analyze, interpret, and 
communicate analysis results.
Accountants often perform data analysis to prepare and verify appropriate recording of 
transactions and reporting of business operations and financial position. They are now also 
performing more data analysis to generate valuable business advice and professional judg-
ments for their internal and external stakeholders. Several leading technologies are making 
this possible.
Value Creation
Accountants have a unique competitive advantage for creating value for their stakeholders 
since their perspectives integrate knowledge across disciplines. Thoughtful data analyses can 
help improve resources and processes to increase operational competitiveness and achieve 
financial objectives (Illustration 10.8).
ILLUSTRATION 10.8  The Data Analysis Value Creation Chain
Value
Creation
Data
Analysis
New
Intelligence
Strategy
Shifs
These opportunities have led to changes in how professional accounting organizations 
and businesses present themselves:
•	The Association of International CPAs (AICPA) and the Institute of Management Accoun-
tants (IMA) have recently rebranded how their members serve their organizations and 
society. They have declared that their primary purpose is to create value for stakeholders, 
which include investors, creditors, customers, suppliers, regulators, and management 
and employees.
•	Similarly, the large international accounting firm PwC recently moved away from the tra-
ditional compliance-facing labels of tax accountant and auditor. PwC’s operations in the 
United States have been reorganized to combine the traditional audit and tax regulatory 
expertise services into “Trust Solutions.” PwC has further rebranded their professionals 
as transparent, trusted business advisors focused on creating value through recommend-
ing sustainable growth outcomes for their clients and the world.
Accounting firms large and small are quickly changing their business models to present 
themselves as expert advisors who create value by performing data analyses to improve gov-
ernance, operations, and compliance strategies for their clients. By following recommenda-
tions for better resource allocations and process improvements, organizations can improve 

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-13
access to capital, trading partners, and performance. For example, data analytics that reveal 
which product or service revenues are most associated with net income increases can grow 
both the client’s and the public’s trust in accountants’ expertise and opinions.
Let’s use a university example to illustrate how recent developments in data analy-
sis have impacted value creation. Historically, faculty at institutions of higher education 
have evaluated internal student performance data to gain insights into how to improve their 
instruction. Access to new data options and analysis tools now allow colleges to analyze 
data from external stakeholders such as alumni, recruiters, advisory boards, and profes-
sional associations to learn which skills and knowledge are demanded by the profession 
(Illustration 10.9).
ILLUSTRATION 10.9  Accounting Knowledge and Skills Demanded  
by Recruiters and Professional Association Standards
Critical
thinking
A skeptical
perspective
Professional
communication,
including
social media
Listening and
observation
Data 
and analysis
skills
Problem-solving
Evaluating
Evidence
Technical
agility
Skills
Demanded
by
Recruiters
Accounting programs can now analyze a variety of valuable data from alumni and 
recruiter surveys, interviews, and high volume and velocity data from social media platforms, 
such as LinkedIn and Facebook, to create courses that produce successful graduates. They can 
also evaluate an accounting program’s effectiveness by external metrics, such as how many 
internships turned into full time post-graduation job offers and by measuring how long it 
takes alumni to be promoted after graduation.
Similarly, accounting professionals are using more types of data and newer analysis tools 
to create value:
•	Data mining tools and electronic contracts for revenue recognition and lease accounting.
•	Routine process automation and process mining tools for improvements in process effi-
ciency and control.
•	Continuous auditing processes to reduce audit risk and improve audit quality.
•	Textual analysis for insights from language used to describe accounting and business out-
comes and predictions.
•	Cognitive technologies using artificial intelligence modeling to predict and classify 
phenomena.

10-14 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
These tools improve the efficiency and productivity of accountants. Regained worktime can 
be repurposed for more activities that add value, such as finding service opportunities and 
interpreting and communicating analysis results to stakeholders.
Data Mining and Smart Contracts
Some may know from personal experience that food sensitivity symptoms are easily diag-
nosed. However, the process of identifying which food(s) are associated with which symptoms 
can require disciplined testing over time. Health professionals often advise eliminating the 
most likely food sensitivity culprits, and systematically, over weeks and months, adding each 
back into the diet to identify specific food allergies.
Similar to the trial and error method of food allergy identification, data mining helps 
accountants systematically understand and test hypotheses while reducing some of the labor 
involved with data analysis. Additionally, smart contract software solutions allow business 
contracts to be securely negotiated, settled, and signed online in a fraction of the traditional 
time.
Data Mining
Increasingly sophisticated data mining tools are better able to handle the recent increases in 
data volume and data variety. These tools quickly diagnose errors and issues in the accounting 
data during the data preparation and exploration steps in the analysis stage. Data mining is also 
used to improve and defend management’s estimations, assumptions, decisions, and assertions. 
Data mining is the systematic practice of looking for issues or patterns occurring within 
or between data fields. Data mining lets us better understand data behavior and test expecta-
tions about data values, patterns, or relationships. The intelligence gained by data mining can 
lead to valuable operational changes:
•	AIS accountants, IT auditors, and application programmers typically mine their data to 
find system delays or errors to identify where new policies, controls, or technologies can 
improve operations.
•	Managerial accountants can use the information provided by data mining to increase sales 
revenues, save costs, or improve operations, such as improving credit by reducing how often 
accounts payable invoices are paid late.
•	Tax accountants can use data mining to find tax deductions and tax credit qualifications 
for their clients. 
Some of the leading data mining vendors include RapidMiner, Alteryx Analytics, SAS Enter-
prise Miner, Sisense, and MySQL. These tools range from those with easy-to-use, friendly 
interfaces to more complex tools that may require using programming languages, such as 
Python or R, to write the desired data mining and tests.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.6: Reflect on Data Mining 
Results
You can improve data mining skills in a couple of ways (Self-Reflection):
•	 Think about how the data value and veracity contribute to creating reliable intelligence and 
insights for the objective of the analysis. This awareness includes watching for results that 
might be random correlations with little or no business value.
•	 Estimate the potential data value that could be created by mining the data, and compare that 
value to the costs and risks associated with continuing current strategies. For example, looking 
for sales revenues to customers from states far from each specific store’s location may help to 
focus efforts on fraudulent invoices.

10.2 Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-15
 ILLUSTRATION 10.10  Product Placement Findings from Supermarket Data Mining 
Persistent demand (milk)
and clearance items are
located in the back, to
motivate customers to
walk through the store
High volume and
impulse buy products
sell best at eye level
Low turnover products
are best placed at the
bottom or top of shelves
 Let’s consider an accounting data mining example. Assume you are hired as a consultant 
to help a law firm identify how to best use their limited professional staff resources. Your 
objective questions may include:
•  Which legal service is the most profitable? 
•  Which service is performed most often? 
•  Which lawyer and paralegal team is currently earning the most client fee revenues for 
the law firm? 
•  Are any legal services being performed without being billed to clients? 
 Data mining tools can help gain insights to answer these questions. For example, you could
use data mining to verify whether all services performed have corresponding invoices. 
 Retail grocery stores, such as Wegmans, Publix, and Kroger, are credited as the first industry 
to create value from sales data mining. Empowered by point-of-sale cash register machines that 
integrated sales and AIS inventory data, supermarkets performed data mining to understand
what store, aisle, and shelf locations were associated with increases in product sales:
•  The first step was to create a categorical data field in their inventory tables which indi-
cated store location (aisle number, front cap, back cap, store front table, register aisle), 
and shelf position (shelf number, and left or right side). 
• The sales data with this location field was mined to learn which product locations were 
associated with high sales volume and which locations with low sales volume. 
•  Systematically and over time, each product’s position in the store was moved to determine 
which positions resulted in higher sales for which products, as well as which products’ 
sales were more resistant to location changes. 
 The next time you go to a grocery store you might notice some intentional product placement 
that is the result of mining store location data along with sales data. For example, temporary 
product promotions (e.g., strawberries during the spring) are best placed on the aisle end caps 
and store front display tables to capture customer attention ( Illustration 10.10 ). 

10-16 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Smart Contracts
A business contract is created whenever two parties, such as buyers and sellers, agree on the 
consideration (usually money) that one party will provide to the other party in exchange for 
goods or services. Business contracts can range from simple exchanges to complex agreements 
with many stipulations. Contract review is important for proper GAAP classifications, such as 
revenue recognition or lease treatment. Historically, contract content was not standardized, 
which meant that both parties had to conduct a detailed review of the contract to ensure 
proper accounting in their separate journals and ledgers.
Blockchain technologies are a new online technology that creates one shared record 
of transactions between parties. These distributed ledgers are extremely secure and cannot be 
altered after an agreement has been reached. Blockchain technologies can be used for transac-
tions with both digital and traditional currencies (Illustration 10.12).
ILLUSTRATION 10.12  Traditional Accounting Ledgers vs. 
Blockchain Ledgers
Seller Buyer
Date
Amount
S
B
9.14.22
10
――――
――――
――――
――――
Cash
10
Revenues
10
Seller S’s Records
Inventory
10
Cash
10
Buyer B’s Records
Traditional Accounting Ledgers
Blockchain Shared
Ledger
A specific and popular application of blockchain technology are smart contracts, 
which are secure online shared digital contracts. Smart contracts are now commonly used in 
healthcare, trading, lending, real estate, insurance, legal services, warranties, employment, 
and gaming contexts. Illustration 10.13 shows some typical smart lease contract data fields.
Data mining is perhaps the most common form of data analytics in accounting practice. 
It is useful for data preparation and data exploration. We can easily check for empty, incorrect, 
invalid, and duplicate data, and perform pattern identification tests, such as learning whether 
unusual logins indicate suspicious or unauthorized activity. Most data mining software dis-
plays the mining steps that have been performed on the data from left to right, which provides 
documentation for data verification procedures. Illustration 10.11 illustrates a simple data 
mining process.
ILLUSTRATION 10.11  A Simple Data Mining Process for Identifying Suspicious  
Bank Deposits
Suspicious
amounts and
unique patterns
Isolate
Visually
Inspect deposit
sizes, timing,
and frequencies
Load
Select
Graph
Bank deposits
data
Bank deposit
date, source,
amount, and
memo fields
Bank deposits
with unusual
amounts and
patterns

10.2  Which Recent Analyses Developments are Accountants Adopting? 
10-17
ILLUSTRATION 10.13  Typical Smart Lease Contract Data Fields
Smart contracts have important advantages over traditional contracts:
•	Contract templates provide organized, approved, and clearly labeled data field options, 
many of which are required by contract law or by GAAP rules for revenue recognition or 
lease categorization.
•	Contract parties collaboratively develop contract specifics using secured online shared 
documents, reducing the time needed for contract negotiation, verification, and signing, 
while providing stronger internal controls. Contract options can be activated or deacti-
vated as needed.
•	All signed contracts cannot easily be changed by either party and all changes made are 
documented with red flags to all parties, which can eliminate many misunderstandings 
and disagreements.
•	Smart contracts can automatically identify contract performance milestones, determine 
performance outcomes, and automatically trigger agreed payments between parties.
The standardized data fields make it easy for financial accountants to review and evaluate 
contracts and determine which GAAP rules are applicable. Auditors can easily verify the con-
tract accounting. In both cases, time traditionally spent data mining contracts can be spent on 
other services that create value.
Process Automation and Process Mining
From doorbell cameras to robotic vacuums, smart sensors and programmable controllers are 
making some homes operate more efficiently and effectively. In the same way, business pro-
cess automation tools are now performing routine tasks, freeing accountants to create value 
with critical thinking, problem-solving, and their resulting professional judgments.
While automated processes within software programs and equipment controllers have 
been available for decades, the recent development of across-program and across-equipment 
integrative tools have transformed many accounting tasks. In addition to greater performance 
accuracy and consistency, these new capabilities are producing activity logs that can be used 
to analyze and improve business processes.
Robotic Process Automation
Robotic process automation (RPA) is the set of software technologies that record a specific 
order of human keystrokes and mouse activity steps within or across digital applications. Once 
saved or recorded, these routines can be repeated by simply re-running the tool. RPA tools are 
Date of Agreement
Agreement Terms: performance and remittance responsibilities, consequences of contract breaches
Committed Assets: verification, fair market value, including any ownership transfers or bargain 
     purchase options
Performance Schedule: timing, performance metrics
Scheduled Automatic Payments: timing, amounts, and automatic payment transfer information
     Rights of each party
Agreement Type
Authenticated Agreement Parties
Secured:
898DFA06F8D44E1..
