10-6 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Data Velocity
Most of us have experienced how rapidly information moves through social media plat-
forms such as Instagram and Twitter. Data velocity refers to the speed with which new 
data points are generated. The higher the data velocity, the faster data volume grows 
(Illustration 10.5).
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.2: Consider the Impact 
of Data Variety on Data Strategy
As the variety of available data and how they are combined increase, the success of your 
data and analysis strategies can be improved by selecting an analysis that is appropriate 
for your data’s measurement scales. One option is transforming unstructured data into 
structured data scales to increase your analysis options. For example, categorizing text 
comments as “positive” or “negative” transforms unstructured text fields into structured 
categorical data which better addresses the needs of marketing and sales managers. 
These two categories can be tested for correlation with other data, such as delays in ship-
ments, to better understand how to best serve the stakeholder providing the comment. 
(Stakeholders, Purpose)
14 trillion cash transactions
400 billion sales and purchases
100 billion business emails
5 billion Google searches
1 billion credit card transactions 
450 million Facebook posts
9 million Instagram posts
400 thousand bitcoin transactions 
The following activities occur
in an average weekday:
ILLUSTRATION 10.5  Data Velocity Continues to Increase
Accountants now regularly use high velocity data. Internal high velocity data can come 
from various sources:
•	Equipment like HVAC (heating, venting, and air conditioning) and smart sensing and 
controlling devices for cost and quality control purposes.
•	Business process tags indicating throughput progress for operational control.
•	Tags on confidential data and sensitive word use for communications originating inside 
the organization to manage legal and market risk.
High velocity data can also come from external sources:
•	Mobile device location alerts indicating when customers are nearby for targeted 
advertising.
•	Location, traffic, weather, and construction alerts for employees operating delivery or 
service trucks to optimize routes and service.
•	Tags on sensitive words in tweets, posts, texts, emails, and blogs that originate outside the 
organization to identify legal risks and market intelligence.
•	Weather and geographic map data for sales forecasting and transport safety.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-7
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.3: Tips for Using High 
Velocity Data
While there are many tweets on Twitter every day, frequently only some are relevant to the 
purpose of an analysis:
•	 A common tool for evaluating high velocity data as they are generated is using an “if, then” 
condition and only storing the data that pass the specific condition. For example, if a tweet 
mentions your company’s name, then that tweet will be stored (Purpose).
•	 The value of high velocity data can be short-lived. The same “if, then” filters that identify which 
data have value can also be used for data purging when that value expires. Being alerted that 
there may be hail in the next hour can protect assets from hail damage, but hail alerts from 
yesterday will not protect assets today. (However, this data could still be valuable to insurance 
companies who are estimating future monthly hail damage claims) (Risks).
Data velocity is also related to the terms big data and internet of things. Coined in 1987 to 
help market new computing systems, big data refers to how high data velocity can quickly 
increase data volume. When traditional AIS data is integrated with high velocity data from 
smart devices, the resulting high variety data set is sometimes called the internet of things. 
Many technological advances, including the cloud data services discussed earlier, have been 
developed to provide solutions for the challenges experienced in storing and processing high 
volume, high variety, and high velocity data.
Data Veracity
We often rely on data to help improve our decisions. Sometimes the data needs to be accurate 
for our objective, and other times data just needs to provide general direction. A weather 
forecast does not have to be exactly accurate to help us dress appropriately. Alternatively, 
an assignment due date or an invoice due date must be precise to ensure we complete the 
assigned work or pay the invoice on time.
Accountants need reliable data from trusted sources to make professional judgments and 
decisions. Data veracity refers to the reliability, or the integrity of the data we select for anal-
ysis. Data veracity depends upon three things:
	 1.	 Whether the data will likely provide insights for the analysis objective, either by itself or 
as a component in an information model, such as a net income calculation.
	 2.	 How accurate the data must be to generate useful insights for the objective.
	 3.	 How complete the data must be to generate useful insights for the objective.
Data veracity is often considered when ranking data and analysis strategy alternatives. Assume 
the objective is to learn whether prior customers become repeat customers or if they purchase 
from competitors instead. One data alternative might be analyzing the content of customers’ 
related social media postings. Another choice is analyzing the last two years of sales data:
•	Social media postings, when authentic, describe current or past customer experience sat-
isfaction (or lack thereof), and may reveal if they are purchasing from competitors. The 
postings do not directly measure whether they would choose to be repeat customers in 
the future.
•	Past sales data probably have higher data integrity and better identify prior repeat cus-
tomers. We do not know if prior choices predict future choices or if customers are pur-
chasing from competitors.

10-8 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
Data Value
Data value refers to the benefits the data provides given the analysis’ objective. Our clothes 
have a different value depending on the day’s agenda. Professional attire is worth more when 
we have an interview, go into the office, or visit clients. Lounge wear, on the other hand, is 
more valuable when working remotely from home or enjoying personal time. Accountants’ 
judgments regarding data value depend on the project’s objective:
•	If the objective is to describe profits or evaluate profit trends, then revenue and expense 
data are valuable data.
•	When diagnosing the causes of decreasing operating cash flows, then data from the cur-
rent asset and current liability accounts are valuable.
•	If the objective is to predict bankruptcy risk, then liquidity and solvency data, such as a 
company’s cash flows and all liabilities, would have data value.
•	When prescribing asset utilization strategies, market data informing about future reve-
nues and expenses have data value.
Let’s illustrate data value with a managerial accounting example. Assume you work for a 
company that manufactures and sells a variety of computer keyboard product lines. You are 
considering dropping a product line because it is operating at a negative net income. Data 
that allows separating traceable fixed expenses from common allocated fixed expenses would 
make it possible to calculate segment contribution margin in addition to the product line net 
income (Illustration 10.6).  ( Data   See How To 10.1 at the end of the chapter to learn how 
to create a comparative income statement in Excel, and then learn how to use an automated 
process to create it in How To 10.2).
How To
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.4: Evaluate Data 
Veracity
Accurately evaluating data veracity helps you select the best data and analysis strategies and 
better interpret the results. Your biases, assumptions, and self-interests, or those of others who 
selected or analyzed the data, may impact how you judge the data’s veracity: (Risks):
•	 Data veracity can be over-rated by the person selecting, preparing, and analyzing the data, as 
most people defend their own choices.
•	Data veracity can also be under-rated when the data or results conflict with what is believed 
or expected about the phenomena, and when you do not know what, if any, controls were 
used when the data was selected, prepared, or analyzed. For example, if you expected sales 
revenues to increase, you may discount data which challenges your expectation.
ILLUSTRATION 10.6  Comparing Data Value of Net Income and Segment Margin
Income Statement
Product A
Product B
Both
Product Lines
Only
Product A
Sales Revenues
$720,000
$1,200,000
$1,920,000
720,000
less Variable Costs
432,000
960,000
1,392,000
432,000
= Contribution Margin
288,000
240,000
528,000
288,000
− Avoidable Fixed 
  Expenses
 
210,000
 
225,000
 
435,000
 
210,000
= Segment Margin
78,000
15,000
93,000
78,000
− Unavoidable Common 
  Fixed Expenses
 
42,000
 
42,000
 
84,000
 
84,000
= Net Income
$  36,000
$   (27,000)
$       9,000
$  (6,000)

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-9
Segment margin provides incremental intelligence value over the net income measure. 
This is because if the segment margin result is positive, then that product line of computer 
keyboards is generating wealth to cover the common fixed expenses. The final column in 
Illustration 10.6 shows that if Product B is dropped, the company would lose the $ 15,000 of 
segment margin generated by Product B and would make a loss ($ 6,000). This example shows 
that the separation of traceable and common fixed expense data has high data veracity.
Economists often measure the value of data by whether it is likely to confirm or change 
expectations about an objective’s phenomena, (e.g., the net income or the segment margin) or 
by how it reduces uncertainty about the phenomena (e.g., the dispersion of the data points). 
In fact, data value is often not fully understood until analysis hypotheses are tested and the 
results of the analysis are available. 
Data Ethics
Using personally identifiable data can raise ethical issues for individuals and organizations. 
On  a daily basis, accountants interact with the personal and  confidential data of clients, 
employees, customers, investors, and creditors. These stakeholders rely on accountants’ 
­professional ethics to make judgments and communicate information while protecting their 
privacy and maintaining the confidentiality of their data. Unintentional and intentional 
­personal data violations can occur in various ways:
•	Collecting and sharing more than the minimally needed private data without explicit 
consent.
•	Failing to provide easy and clear opt-in and opt-out consent for data collection, sharing, 
and deletion (pre-checked boxes on websites do not provide explicit consent).
•	Limiting access or opportunities for those who opt-out of sharing their personal data.
•	Inadequate data access controls, such as encryption, which lead to access violations.
Many specific types of data, such as personally identifiable information, client financial 
records, employee pay and health records, and a company’s future strategic plans, are pro-
tected by laws and regulations.
Privacy Laws
Illustration 10.7 summarizes the leading data privacy laws in the United States.
ILLUSTRATION 10.7  U.S. Data Privacy Laws
Law
Description
The Privacy Act of 1974
Restricts use of data held by government 
agencies.
Health Information Privacy Protection Act of 
2013 and the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
Restricts the sharing of individual’s health 
care data, with fines up to $10,000 per 
violation.
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)
Limits and protects the credit-related personal 
data collected and shared.
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA)
Protects the privacy of educational records.
The Gramm-Leach Bliley Act (GLBA)
Requires loan and investment service 
providers to disclose personal data sharing.
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA) and Patriot Acts
Restricts when and how individuals’ private 
data communications can be legally surveilled.
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(COPPA)
Restricts personal data collected from minors 
and extends to third parties’ data use.

10-10 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
U.S. states are also passing their own data privacy laws at varying speeds:
•	California, Illinois, and Colorado were the first states to pass comprehensive consumer 
data privacy laws.
•	Other states, such as Massachusetts, New York, Hawaii, Maryland, and North Dakota, are 
moving forward with both partial and comprehensive data privacy law proposals that are 
currently in committee at their state legislatures.
The progress of these laws can be tracked on websites such as the International Association 
of Privacy Professionals. To help accountants navigate this data privacy landscape, there are 
ethical standards, privacy policies, and codes of conduct.
Ethical Standards and Privacy Policies
Ethical standards for using personal data assume that accountants will stay current with the 
relevant data privacy laws and regulations. Inappropriately sharing a client’s confidential con-
tact information, financial status, or tax liability can result in losing client trust and a damaged 
professional reputation. Some data privacy infractions may have much more serious conse-
quences, such as losing professional licenses or other sanctions:
•	The Institute of Management Accountants’ (IMA) ethical standards require manage-
rial accountants to act with competence, confidentiality, integrity, and credibility when 
interacting with their organization’s data, particularly the personally identifiable data of 
employees and customers.
•	The Association of International Certified Professional Accountants (AICPA) has 
similar due care ethical standards for CPAs using private and confidential data. CPAs 
also have ethics requirements about their objectivity and avoiding conflicts of interest.
•	Tax accountants, whether certified or not, must abide by the strict data confidentiality 
requirements of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The IRS code sections 6013 and 7213 
require tax accountants and IRS employees to maintain an individual’s tax return data 
privacy and security. Violations risk misdemeanor charges, fines up to $5,000, and impris-
onment up to five years per infraction.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.5: Learn About Data Laws 
and Regulations
Accountants must know the cultural, legal, regulatory, and transparency expectations for the 
collection, storage, and uses of personal data, both in the United States and globally. For exam-
ple, if your company is expanding to the European Union, then per the GDP you must offer 
those customers the ability to opt out of having their private information stored after a sales 
transaction is fulfilled. You can find some of the current laws and regulation at the following 
sources (Knowledge):
•	 The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
•	 Center for Internet Security’s critical security controls
•	 NIST Critical Infrastructure Security Framework
•	 National Conference of State Legislatures’ Security Breach Notification Laws
Ethics and the Effects of Data Velocity and Volume
Whenever you activate your navigation app’s location feature, either in your vehicle or cell 
phone, any data partner of that navigation app can access your location and movements 
throughout the day. This example of high data velocity and volume highlights new complex­
ities when developing and maintaining compliant data privacy and security systems.
Data privacy is especially an issue for accountants when using internet browsers to access 
clients’ or organizations’ private data. A single website visit can place tracking cookies, as well 
as many third-party cookies, on our computers. If not immediately removed, these cookies 
can capture data retrieved from future website pages, username and password keystrokes, and 
cursor movements.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-11
In the United States it is legal for apps or cookies running in a browser’s background to 
collect, use, and share data without explicit permission if the information collected does not 
include individual user identifiers and is not used for identity theft. However, the risk of per-
sonal data being gathered exists. An easy and cost-free preventative control for this is to go into 
the browser settings and clear stored cookies (also known as clearing the browsing history) at 
the beginning and end of every browser session. Of course, the most secure solution is access-
ing private data from within the security of a virtual private network.
Considering data volume, variety, veracity, velocity, value, and ethics within the context 
of your analyses’ objectives can help you make the best choices when designing data and 
analysis strategies. Next, let’s learn about the power we can harness from recent technological 
developments in analysis tools.
Apply It 10.1
Identify Data 
Characteristics
Managerial Accounting   You an accountant for Limitless Outdoor, a leading outdoor gear com-
pany. The objective of your data analysis project is to learn more about your company’s sales and 
product quality from last year. For each data field, indicate which data characteristics best describe it. 
(More than one data characteristic can be used to describe a data field.) 
Data Field
Data Characteristic
Sleeping bag fabric durability rating from quality testing.
Sales revenues from repeat customers and new customers during 
the last 12 months.
Cell phone data captured from bicycle rides using a navigation app.
Variability of manufacturing equipment performance every  
five minutes during use.
Naturally occurring bundles of camping equipment and outdoor 
clothing sales each month.
Hourly outside temperatures during weekend days when most 
customers are using the equipment.
Customer comments about their outdoor product satisfaction on 
social media platforms.
SOLUTION
Data Field
Data Characteristic
Sleeping bag fabric durability rating from quality testing.
Value
Sales revenues from repeat customers compared to new 
customers during the last 12 months.
Veracity and value
Cell phone data captured from bicycle rides using a navigation 
app.
Volume and variety
Variability of manufacturing equipment performance every  
five minutes during use.
Volume
Naturally occurring bundles of camping equipment and outdoor 
clothing sales each month.
Value
Hourly outside temperatures during weekend days when most 
customers are using the equipment.
Volume
Customer comments about their outdoor product satisfaction on 
social media platforms.
Variety and volume
(This is a suggested solution; other relevant insights might also be correct.)
