10-0
C H A PT E R 10
Recent Data and 
Analyses Developments 
in Accounting
Objective
Strategy
Analysis
Interpret
Communicate
Motivation
Recent Data Developments
Recent Analyses Developments
Chapter Preview
This chapter reviews a variety of new data and analysis technologies that can add value and 
create opportunities for your professional work. These opportunities are limited only by your 
interest, creativity, and initiative. In fact, new data sources and analysis technologies are 
improving every step of the data analysis process.
Professional Insight: What Opportunities do Data and Analyses 
Developments Offer?
Neo recently finished his internship in a financial institution and summarized his introduction 
to the endless possibilities and opportunities available by pursuing a career in accounting.
I discovered a passion for combining accounting and finance data during my intern-
ship. By analyzing accounting information trends, I could help define my client’s cap-
ital needs and find the lowest cost capital sources. I used diverse data sources and 
complex analyses to describe and predict my clients’ financial value, cash flows, 
and capital needs to help me prescribe the best capital source alternatives.
I loved developing models to predict my client’s cash needs and prescribe the sources 
and costs associated with their capital sourcing options. For example, I helped one cli-
ent decide whether to extend ownership or borrow funds with prediction models. Ana-
lyzing their cash flows revealed they could afford to leverage more debt. I created my 
models from data from the accounting system, financial statements, electronic 
contracts, such as leases and loans, and company-related social media posts, 
using both structured and unstructured data.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-1
These experiences fostered the creative skills necessary to build models that measure 
future performance and economic valuation, whether the client is a public, private, 
nonprofit, or government organization. I feel that my work had purpose because I 
was helping clients find opportunities to increase their sustainable competitive 
­advantages. That sense of purpose has reinforced my choice to study accounting.
Chapter Roadmap
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TOPICS
APPLY IT
 LO 10.1   Describe data trends 
impacting the accounting 
profession.
•	 Data Volume
•	 Data Variety
•	 Data Velocity
•	 Data Veracity
•	 Data Value
•	 Data Ethics
Identify Data Characteristics
(Example: Managerial 
Accounting)
 LO 10.2   Explain how technology 
developments are impacting 
data analysis in accounting.
•	 Value Creation
•	 Data Mining and Smart Contracts
•	 Process Automation and Process Mining
•	 Continuous Auditing
•	 Textual Analysis
•	 Cognitive Technologies
Use Process Automation 
to Analyze Financial 
Statements
(Example: Financial 
Accounting)
 LO 10.3   Demonstrate how data 
and technology developments 
are adding value to professional 
practice.
•	 Accounting Information Systems
•	 Auditing
•	 Financial Accounting
•	 Managerial Accounting
•	 Tax Accounting
Match Professional Practice 
Areas to Analyses and 
Technologies
10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting 
Accounting Practice?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ➊
Describe data trends impacting the accounting profession.
More data from new and diverse sources are available every day. Consider the online course 
management platforms used by college students around the world. These learning man-
agement systems can track each selection a student makes during online learning. If your 
Data   The Data tag appears in the chapter when the data for an example, illustration, or application are  
available on Wiley’s online learning platform.
Data analytics software is continuously changing, and there may be more recent versions of the software refer-
enced in this chapter. For more information access the accompanying video on Wiley’s online learning platform.

10-2
CHAPTER 10 Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
objective is to do well in a course, then this data can be analyzed to provide valuable feedback 
about which concepts you still need to master so you can focus on learning them. 
 Accountants are also encountering new data options and characteristics from sources 
both internal and external to their organizations. Whether that data is valuable depends on 
their objectives. If the objective is improving tax planning, then internet chatter data about 
upcoming tax policy changes could be valuable. Of course, this same chatter may not be valu-
able if the objective is to evaluate shipping costs for the year. 
 As accountants perform analyses using more data and increasingly powerful computers 
and analysis tools, they must consider how increases in data volume, variety, velocity, and 
veracity add value to their analyses. Illustration 10.1 defines these five data characteristics 
and provides examples in each professional practice area. 
V
V
V
V
V
Value
Volume
Size of
Data Set
Data Set
Structures
Data
Creation Rate
Data
Integrity
Veracity
Velocity
Variety
The Five
V’s of Data
Potential for
Incremental
Intelligence
 ILLUSTRATION 10.1  The Five Data “Vs” 
Characteristic
Examples
Volume
In AIS:
• Process flow logs
• Security alerts
• System error logs
• Transactions
• Firewall traffic
• System and application access logs
Variety
In auditing:
• Codes, approval stamps, text, 
pictures, dates, and recorded 
values
• Fair market values at year end
Velocity
In financial accounting:
• Cash transactions
• Stock price changes
• Social media content
Veracity
In managerial accounting:
• Transactions
• Prices and costs
• Vendor and customer data
• Sensor data from smart machines
Value
In tax accounting:
• Local, national, and international 
tax changes
• Sales tax jurisdictions and rates
This section covers the impact of each data characteristic on accounting data analytics, 
then explains the ethical implications accountants consider throughout the data analysis 
process stages.
 Data Volume
 Imagine if the number of clothes in your closet grew exponentially each year. Depending on 
your closet’s size, you might run out of storage space and struggle to locate the items you need 
when you need them. Adding storage space and proper organization could cost you both time 
and resources. 
 Accountants are experiencing similar increases in data, which is leading to more data 
storage and organization costs and more data strategy options.  Data volume refers to the 
amount of data selected for an analysis project. Data volume is typically limited by the com-
puter and analysis tool  capacities required for the data analyses. 

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-3
Increases in Data Volume
Business operating cycles in large organizations are currently capturing and storing millions 
of sales, ­purchases, receipts, and payments each day, in addition to email, social media, and 
internet traffic content. Organizations are also storing more data than ever before. In fact, 
experts believe the volume of data produced by organizations will continue to increase expo-
nentially in the next decade (Illustration 10.2).
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2020
2025
Years
Times increased
based on 2020
Volume of Organizational Data
2030
2035
ILLUSTRATION 10.2  Organizations are Producing More Data
Two factors are contributing to this:
	 1.	 Technologies that are connecting and integrating data from traditionally separate sys-
tems, such as the AIS, internet content, and smart device sensors.
	 2.	 Decreasing computer costs and increasing computer memory and processing capabilities 
make it easier for organizations to capture, store, and analyze more data.
Of course, with more data comes more costs. Businesses need more computer hardware and 
software capacity, data privacy, security expertise, and internal controls. To address these 
challenges, organizations are turning to new solutions for storing and processing their large 
data sets.
Developments in Data Storage
A popular solution for storing high data volume are cloud data services. Cloud data ser-
vices provide secure data storage on large servers, using the organization’s own resources or 
resources provided by third parties. You might be familiar with some of the data clouds used 
by college students, such as Google Drive, Microsoft’s OneDrive, pCloud, sync.com, mega.io, 
and box.com. What are the benefits of cloud data services? Benefits include:
•	Easily expandable data storage capacities.
•	Expert data management.
•	Secure data, hardware, and software.
•	IT expertise and advice.
There are three types of cloud data services. The key difference between them is if and how the 
cloud service provider’s servers are shared: 
•	Private clouds are restricted access data storage centers created for the data of one orga-
nization or shared between an agreed upon set of companies. Private shared clouds often 
include a single large company, a group of supply chain partners, or non-competing inde-
pendent companies from different industries. Private clouds, provided by third parties 
such as HP Enterprise, VMWare, Microsoft, Cisco, and Amazon, are the fastest growing 
cloud sector.

10-4 
CHAPTER 10  Recent Data and Analyses Developments in Accounting
•	Public clouds securely store data from multiple companies on shared servers using vir-
tual server data separators. Leading public cloud service vendors include Google Cloud 
Platform, Amazon Web Services (AWS), and Microsoft Azure.
•	Hybrid clouds offer both private and public cloud data storage, serving the needs of the 
security and use characteristics of the data involved. Amazon and Microsoft are two lead-
ing vendors providing hybrid cloud solutions.
APPLYING CRITICAL THINKING 10.1: Evaluate Cloud Data 
Services
Use critical thinking when deciding which data cloud type best serves your data needs by 
researching prices and services offered by viable data cloud vendors (Knowledge).
The best data cloud can also be selected by considering the following factors (Alternatives):
•	 The volume of data you need to store.
•	 How often and how much of the data needs to be added, modified, and retrieved.
•	 Data privacy and data security requirements.
•	 Your budget for cloud data services.
•	 The reputation of the vendor.
While organizations might prefer to store their data in private clouds, both private and public 
shared cloud services can provide significant cost savings. Think of it as living in a building 
with several separate apartments. Some people might prefer to live in a house by themselves, 
but a shared structure often means saving money on housing costs. Illustration 10.3 summa-
rizes the typical benefits and costs of each type of data cloud.
ILLUSTRATION 10.3  Comparing Cloud Data Services
Data Cloud
Benefits
Costs
Private Clouds
Data storage for a single 
organization.
•	 Offers high data privacy and data 
security.
•	 Offers high data interactivity.
•	 More customization and 
adaptability are possible.
•	 Can be the most expensive 
option.
•	 May be difficult to manage 
if developed in-house 
without hiring staff with 
cloud expertise.
Data storage that is shared 
by a set group of non-
competing organizations.
•	 All the benefits of single 
organization storage, especially 
for data interactivity between 
supply chain partners.
•	 Sharing data storage makes it a 
less expensive option for each 
company.
•	 Can have some restrictions 
on customization and 
adaptability.
•	 May involve shared 
contracts and joint revisions.
Public Clouds
Public clouds are shared 
by many organizations 
who can easily come and 
go from the public cloud.
•	 Lowest individual company cost.
•	 Fastest implementation.
•	 Most appropriate for small 
businesses.
Least adaptable or 
customizable cloud data 
service.
Hybrid Clouds
Include both private and 
public cloud virtual server 
sections.
The benefits and costs associated with both private and public clouds 
also apply to hybrid clouds. Hybrid clouds allow organizations to 
choose which data subset is best stored in a private cloud, while 
storing the rest in a public cloud for the cost efficiencies.

10.1  Which Data Trends are Impacting Accounting Practice? 
10-5
Some vendors of cloud data services also offer cloud computing services, providing the 
software computing power that is often needed when organizations process and analyze large 
volumes of data. A recent market strategy pivot is the movement of high tech and internet ser-
vice companies towards also providing private and public cloud data and computing services, 
leveraging their existing data storage, processing, and security service reputations.
Data Variety
Data variety refers to the diversity of data structures and measurement scales in the data 
we want to analyze. Let’s return to the wardrobe example. We can describe our clothes with a 
variety of structured data fields: categorical scale fields such as color and type (shirts, shoes, 
etc.), ordinal scale fields such as size, interval scale fields such as how long we have owned the 
garment, or ratio scale fields such as how much it originally cost.
Accountants have traditionally selected and analyzed structured data that are easily rep-
resented in rows and columns, such as categorical account codes, interval transaction dates, 
and ratio values for the transaction amounts and account balances. Recently, accountants are 
combining structured data with unstructured data, including text, smart device sensor read-
ings, and pictures and graphics, to increase the value created from their analyses.
Illustration 10.4 provides examples of unstructured data that can be combined with 
traditional transaction data from customer orders, inventory, shipments, invoices, and 
collections.
ILLUSTRATION 10.4  Analyzing the Sales Function: The Impact of Data Variety
Traditional Data Used
in Sales Analysis
Enhanced with
New Data Options 
Sales Orders
Shipments
Invoices
Collections by Inventory Product
Customers
Salespersons
Stores or Regions
Budgeted Versus Actual Sales
Online Customer Reviews
and Comments
Weather Patterns
GPS Locations
Population Demographics
Targeted Promotions
Purchases Quality
+
Valuable business intelligence can be created by combining unstructured data with tradi-
tional structured data for analysis:
•	Shipping truck GPS data can be integrated with AIS data to find the most efficient deliv-
ery routes, reducing truck wear and tear by reducing mileage driven, reducing fuel costs, 
and improving delivery time.
•	Integrating weather data with sales transaction data to anticipate customer traffic pat-
terns and allow for better service.
•	Combining customer reviews with inventory turnover to assess vendor and product 
effectiveness.
•	Integrating GPA mapping data with cell phone location data can evaluate or develop tar-
geted advertising campaigns or for marketing intelligence about future products.
